# Dragonshire Province

The Dragonshire sits between Heartland Province to the west and south and the Kingdom of Men to the north; it also borders on the Glass Sea, where, in other times, it might do brisk trade with the Human and Goblin nations.

[[abstract]]
|
|A province long defined by the cooperative co-evolution of its Dragon and Drake nobility, its elites, its guilds, and its common folk.
|A history of trade and conflict with the neighboring Kingdoms of Men have led to the development of both prosperous trade-routes and sophisticated military doctrines.
|
|---
|
|Population: 135M
|
|Common Languages: Rak, Noble Weal, High Kobold, Royal, *more*
|
|Common Races: Human (55%), Drakes (25%), Kobolds (10%), *more*

### History

#### Founding

Centuries ago, before the first Charter, the land that would become Heartland Province was cut off from Empire of Man when the dragon named Karrach led a rebellion — supported by a faction of the local wealthy and Imperial administrators — that allowed him to claim a swath of Imperial territory for his own.
(Karrach could speak Old Imperial, and gave "Karrach" as his name when addressing Humans in their own language; in Commonwealth Standard, he is called the Red-Scaled King.)
The territory, once the frontier of the Empire, had grown wealthy and urban in its own right, and the elite of these new cities chaffed at their duties to the distant Three Cities; in Karrach and his kin, they had a chance at independence.

The rebellion began in early winter in Year-of-the-Old-Empire 226 (CY -227), in a year when the army was not mustered; Karrach's rebellion had only to subdue the local garrisons, which was easy enough if they where denied the support and quarter of the locals.
Forces from further west where cut off form Imperial command; and also frequently found that they could not depend on the support of the locals — west of the Dragonshire, there was no great love of the Three Cities.
Cut off from much of their territory beyond the Golden Plane — and with much of their distant territory having no great willingness to pay tribute to the distant Three Cities or comply with a levy — the Empire of Man found it difficult to muster an army to reclaim their lost territory.

Karrach granted his kin noble titles, and shared the rule of the Dragonshire with them; however, their numbers where few — enough so that they could not control their new territory without the tacit consent of the elites among their new territories.
The two consequences of this — the need for the Dragon nobility to compensate for their small numbers, and their need to maintain the support of the Human populace — shaped much of the Dragonshire's early history.

Karrach immediately began to enlist the support of other Dragons; beyond his immediate kin, he extended an offer of land and title to any other dragon who would bow to his rule — as long as they had the wisdom to keep the good will of the Human subjects they ruled.
Dragons are few, long-lived and cautious — but Karrach's terms where generous; a steady stream of dragons came to serve him, and where granted lands and titles.
In the Dragonshire's early years, Karrach distributed lands carefully among his new nobles, and kept a careful watch over them — even as he desperately needed a dragon nobility to govern his new territory, he could not afford for them to be disloyal or incompetent.

Early on, even while the Empire of Man desired to regain their former lands, the wealthy of the Dragonshire and their new Dragon lords tested one another.
In the short term, Karrach preserved the system of taxes and levies that the Empire had used; he used the taxes to fund a small professional force, and a levy of labor to both grow those ranks and to upgrade the fortifications along his eastern border.
Ultimately, Karrach and his nobles cooperated with his Human subjects much more than they undermined each other; while the elite among his Human subjects did attempt, as ever, to avoid his taxes and levies, they ultimately had to ensure that Karrach's forces remained strong enough to repel the coming attack from the Empire of Man.

In Year-of-the-Old-Empire 231 (CY -221), 234 (CY -218) and 241 (CY -211), the Empire made attempts to regain the Dragonshire; each was repelled.
During this time, the Dragon and Human populations found ways cooperate with one-another, and built a body of custom and agreement that would continue to serve them after the immediate threat of Imperial reclamation subsided.

Ultimately, though, Karrach knew that he could not depend on a few dragons — from distant lands, with no bond of kinship or prior culture — to rule his lands; he needed a *people*.
He put out a call to any Great Spirit who could provide him with one; ultimately, in Year-of-the-Old-Empire 331 (CY -121), he was answered by a mercurial and mysterious spirit, which variably identified itself as *the Bulrush God*, *the Rainstorm Shepherd* and *the Osprey’s Father*, amongst other names.
The *Bulrush God* gave Karrach the ability to crate *holy sites*, and a ritual that they could perform there to turn a *dragon's* egg into an egg for a new type of creature — a *drake*.
Drakes where smaller and less powerful than dragons, but far more fecund; they would provide Karrach with his *people*.

Early on, Karrach pursued peace and good relations with the former Imperial territories to his west — what would become the Commonwealth.
His enemy was the Empire of Man, who would attempt to bring his territory back under their control.
This peaceful relationship continued as the Commonwealth formed and the Empire of Man weakened and collapsed; the Dragonshire was a useful barrier between the free lands to the west and the Empire, and trade between the Commonwealth and Dragonshire was highly profitable.
In CY 17 a peace-treaty was signed, and in CY 41 the Commonwealth and Dragonshire became allies; this proved invaluable to both.
Besides continuing prosperous trade, the two profited from being "brothers back-to-back" — the border between the Dragonshire and Commonwealth could be undefended, so that the Commonwealth could focus on fighting the Shaded Sea while the Dragonshire focused on resisting the Empire of Man (and, later, the Kingdoms of Men).

The pair also had a mutual enemy in the Goblin Kingdoms.
As early as Year-of-the-Old-Empire 231, almost two hundred years before the Commonwealth formed (CY -194), an alliance of powerful Goblin Kings on their northern shore rose to threaten both the Empire of Man and the Dragonshire — which forced the weakening Empire to abandon its attempts to reclaim the Dragonshire, but also furnished both the Empire and the Dragonshire with a new enemy.
The Goblin Kingdoms would remain a vital enemy after the Empire of Man collapsed in CY 87, continuing to threaten the Commonwealth and Dragonshire for almost four centuries; the power of the Goblin Kings finally broke with a disastrous failed invasion of the Dragonshire and Commonwealth in CY 148.

The collapse of the Empire in CY 87 and the failure of the Goblin assault in CY 148 marked the ascendancy of the "brothers back-to-back" as the preeminent power on the Emerald Plane.

Ultimately, the Kingdoms of Men would rise from the ashes of the Empire of Man; successive eras of Goblin power would also come and go.
Through the centuries, the Commonwealth and Dragonshire remained powerful allies; finally, in CY 744, the Dragonshire joined the Commonwealth as a province.

#### Sharing Power

Over time, power in the Dragonshire has tended away from the nobility, and towards the general populace.

In CY 177, the elites of Forge-of-the-Mountaineers — its wealthy guildsmen, landlords and land-holders, and clergy — formed the Steel Council, to concentrate their political power when dealing with the Lord Steel; they where careful not to overstep their bounds, and the Lord Steel shrewdly considered their "council."
In the following years, more "Freeman's Councils" where formed — and met with greater and lesser degrees of acceptance, depending on how bold they where, and how accommodating the local Lords where.
In CY 197, Karrach issued the Free-Council Decree, which formally granted the elite of his territories the right to form Freeman's Councils — and spelled out what conditions those councils had to meet, and what obligations the Lords did and did not have to them.

As Karrach's domain grew and prospered, so to did the wealth and power of its common population.
Karrach had abolished Slavery as such in CY 16; in CY 241, he formally limited the conditions that could be placed on tenants and bondsmen — effectively increasing the basic right guaranteed to (almost) all in his domain.
(These changes where resisted by the Freeman's Councils, whose elite membership resented the reduction of their power).
In CY 244, Karrach issued the sweeping Citizen's Reform; this granted every resident on his domains the status of a Citizen, and spelled out the minimum rights and privileges guaranteed to each Citizen.
It also create the Citizen's Councils (which where open to any Citizen who did not meet the property requirements for the Freeman's Councils) and the Guild's Councils (to which every guild in a manor could elect a representative).

Growing pressure from the Second High Kingship (starting in the Kingdoms of Men in CY 361) and the first King-by-the-Assembly (appointed by the Goblin's Noble Assembly in 378) began to lay bare the need for a more efficient, centralized bureaucracy.
Rather than attempt to consolidate power under himself — a move that, besides being less than moral, would have been resisted by the Freeman's and Citizen's Councils, at a time that the Dragonshire could ill afford internal conflict — Karrach began to work on a centralized body drawn from his Nobles and their Councils, that could govern with the support of the all the Dragonshire's various classes and interests.
In CY 391, after much political negotiation, Karrach, with the support of his nobles and a large majority of their Freeman's, Citizen's and Guild's councils, created the Dragonshire Parliament, and reorganized much of the Dragonshire's government beneath it.
The Parliament consisted of three chambers: the Noble's Chamber, representing those with titles; the Elite's Chamber, representing the Dragonshire's monied and propertied interests; and the Citizen's Chamber, which represented the common citizenry.
(Though he had abandoned direct control over the administration of the Dragonshire, Karrach remained its king, and became also the Lord of the Noble's Chamber.)

### The Culture of the Dragonshire

### The Dragonshire's Military

### The Northland Corridor

The Northland Corridor is a strip of land running north-to-south along the Worldspine Mountain.
Historically, the area was settled by both the Commonwealth and Dragonshire — leaving control of the area disputed.
The dispute was settled in CY 65, when an agreement seeded the territory to the Dragonshire, under the condition the Dragonshire had to allow the Commonwealth-aligned settlements to operate under certain terms of the Commonewalth Charter, and that the Dragonshire had to allow Commonwealth traders free travel through the area.

The Northland Corridor became something of a vital trade route, connecting the Commonwealth to the south with the Dwarves and Orcs to the north — what would eventually become Northland Province.

Even now that the Dragonshire is a province of the Commonwealth, the Northland Corridor remains an important trade route, connecting Heartland and Northland provinces.

> Katarina: the complex web of legal statuses in the Corridor — combined with the fact that, historically, traders from Heartland could just wander through there half-outside the Dragonshire's jurisdiction — has meant that there's been a fair amount of smuggling going through Northland.
>
> Fire: Sort of makes you wonder why the Dragonshire doesn't shut it down, doesn't it?
>
> Chandra: I've heard that the High Road sometimes finds it useful to have a way to move people around off-the-books.
>
> Fire: You've heard.
>
> Chandra: I've heard.

### Major City: Stormsword's Rest

[[abstract]]
|
|Stormswor'd Rest is a small walled city straddling a narrow pass that leads west across the Worldspine.
|Well-fortified and highly-definsible, it guards the east against campaigns launched out of the independant territories of the northwest, or by unaligned Orcs and Dwarves; it also hosts some of the Dragonshire's premier war-colleges.
|Both controlling one of the rare passes through the Worldspine and sitting in the Northland Corridor, it is also a major trade hub.
|It is also a polyglot city, hosting populations from a dizzying array of races, many from outside the Commonwealth (possibly owing to being a major center of High Road activiy).
|
|---
|
|Population: varies; 90K permanent, plus stationed troops
|
|Common Languages: Weal, Hartland Gnoll, *more*
|
|Common Races: varies; Humans (20%), Gnolls (20%), Drakes (10%), Orcs(10%), Kobolds (5%), plus others and stationed troops
|
|Location: In the northwest of Dragonshire Province, in the foothills of the Worldspine Mountains.
|
|Industries: Soldiery, Command, Administration, Seigecraft, Masonry, Smithing, Farming

Stormsword’s Rest is a large walled township that sits in the northwest of the Dragonshire Province, in the lower peaks in the northeast fringe of the Worldspine Mountain.
It covers a narrow pass through the Worldspine Mountains, which rises to the West; to the East, it looks down on rugged highlands, rolling foothills and river-run lowlands of the Northland Corridor.
The region is known as the Worldspine Pass March; though small, it is strategically vital for the Dragonshire, as it sits at the nexus of two trade-routes, and in particular controlls access to the Dragonshire from north-west Northland Province.
(In the taxonomy of the Dragonshire, a *township* is something larger than a village, but smaller than a city proper; a township typically has one or more temples, one or more market-ssquares, a noble leige and some form of garrison.)

Despite a lack of local material, the township is home to several stonemason, blacksmith and carpentry workshops; the apprentices of these shops are highly valued for their skills throughout the Dragonshire and Greater Commonwealth.
To the east, the rough highlands lend themselves to herding sheep and goats, and fertile but hard land supports a few scattered orchards.
To the west, in the pass proper, there are quarries that date back to the original construction of the town’s walls.

The township itself sits at the mouth of the pass, encircled by walls in concentric rings, the outer of which reach the sides of the valley itself.
Dense structures fill the residential blocks, larger buildings straddling the streets with bridges.
On the northern edge of the city, perched atop a retainer wall, there is a relatively large university, famous for it’s natural philosophy lectures.
To the southern edge, a military academy sits atop its own wall, training Dragonshire officers for the Commonwealth Military.

The town's population is diverse.
Topside, the town is dominated by Gnolls, Humans, and Drakes; tunnels in the northern valley-wall and southern retaining walls lead underground to a community of Kobolds, Dwarves, Ash Elves.
Sitting on the passageway through the worldspine, Stormsword’s Rest is also often host to a large population of traders and wagoneers.
The population of the town has exploded in recent times, with an oddly high number of escaped and former slaves taking up residence.

The town’s symbol, and the symbol of its ruling family, is a black image of an open gatehouse, overlaid on a fortified tower and sitting upon a red field.
It is often joined by a smaller crest, of a black-blue and brown-green field, with a silver or white dragon skull and mangrove tree.
The town is constructed largely of grey stone and imported woods, and the limited pallet of colours is offset by bright banners and pennants in the colours of the town, and the commonwealth as a whole.
Large painted murals and colourful mosaics decorate where they can, and small, well-maintained window gardens are a source of pride in the densely-built blocks of the city.

Stormsword Manor itself sits at the centre of town.
It is a single, fortified tower with an undying flame at it’s top, atop a slight rise that has been manicured into angular and refined gardens for public use.
The manor-house is a later construction; it is slightly curved, and built into the foundations of the tower.
It has a relatively plain frontage, and its doors are opened to all.
The main floor is given over to the town council and administration, with the Marchess's home starting on the second floor.

To the western edge of the town is the main mustering-point of the Northwestern Levee, a powerful military division lead by the General Stormsword.
Professional soldiery is housed and trained there, and volunteers, conscripts, and draftees will assemble there in times of war and strife.

On the outskirts of the farms to the east, there is a large, well-appointed Dancing Hawk stable, where the Marchess indulges in her hobby of breeding and training the animals.

The township is relatively orderly, but there is still a criminal underbelly, making use of deep shadows and alleyways.
Smugglers and shady groups have a notable presence, as they do throughout the Northland Corridor.
They dominate underworld dealings, and have an all-but-open relationship with the town council – despite the Stormswords' best efforts.

The town is also notable for its guilds and trade-unions.
Bargaining blocks of tradespeople and farmers, establishing standards of practice and allowing for a unified front for bargaining against political interference in their businesses.
They also ensure fair and even handling of apprenticeships, and oversee the relationship between wagoneers and local tradespeople and farmers.

#### Ruling Family

The local noble family is known as ‘Valley Storm’ In Commonwealth Standard, and have been Lords and leaders in Stormsword’s Rest for generations.
The city is named for the current Marchess’s grandfather, who was a skilled blacksmith and powerful campaigner.

The Marchess herself, *Xhosra Quillion-Durandal*, Stormsmaiden in common, is approximately 80 to 90 years of age, slightly older than her husband.
She is a local-born Drake; she descends from a clan whose Dragon progenitor was serpentine in gross layout, and winged.
Her family history is somewhat muddled, but it has left her with a long tail and brilliant, midnight-blue plumage.
She has prominent wings, with dextrous fingers at the wrist joint, and flourishing into bright yellows and reds along the trailing edge.
It is held that some of her ancestors where prominent performers in the amphiteatre, and that this may be why she is also somewhat lean and small, at least by Drake standards, though also quick-witted, deft, and confident.
She also possesses a keen analytical mind, and unsurprisingly is a powerful stateswoman.

Her husband is a member of the Stormsword line, the General Chandra Durandal, known originally (if unflatteringly) as Pukescale due to his uncomfortable yellow-green scales (and his ancestry).
The Durandal line is a hybrid of several Clans, whose Dragon progenitors where swamp-swimmers and "death-walkers" from the East.
Though his ranks was originally a social title, received when he married the Marchess, he has since proved himself worthy of it.
He has been a highly effective campaigner, known for his powerful build, for the mighty golem limb on his left side, and for his mastery of Dragonshire sword-craft – he is considered perhaps the greatest master of the Wyrmblade in the  Dragonshire.
He is also notable for a surprising understanding of architecture and construction, and a talent for seigecraft.
(His manner is far more blunt than his wife's, and so negotiations are often left to her.)

The couple have several children: there is a daughter just coming into adulthood, Xoshara Quillion-Durandal, and twin sons.
Xoshara herself has dedicated herself to learning her father’s trade in combat, and learning swordsmanship to her fullest; also, much like her father, she is determined to earn her rank, and so has begun her career with the town guard, where she wears a simple uniform to downplay her social rank. The sons are encouraged to make friends and explore through the town, and are well known throughout the parks and market-squares.
All three are being tutored and educated by their parent’s staff.

#### Notable People

The staff of the Manoral family take advisory and leadership roles in the town. An accountant and treasury officer of the family and town as a whole, a herder who eschews the traditional garb and behaviour of his own people. He decorates his antlers in ribbons, and wears suitably commonwealth-style, though colourful and fine clothing. He works to teach the children in mathematics and natural philosphy, and serves as a personal assistant to the Marchess in matters of law and contract. His work in a coin mint earned him the name ‘Coinhammer’
The master of assassins, a master swordsman and former slave with a vast collection of swords. Dressed far more simply, but never unarmed. Named Silver in common; Mercurio is a dark-haired, and olive-skinned human. A gladiator of some reknown in the kingdoms of men, and bearer of an aged and worn gladius sword that was once an artefact of the cult of the one. He is steadfast in his dedication to the ruling family, though, and a favoured sparring partner of Chandra.
The local leader of the High Road is an older goblin woman. Living underground in the kobold sections of town, she makes her daily coin by working as a brewer. Having apprenticed under master brewers in the town proper, she works on making alchemical potions of all kinds of uses. She has a good relationship with the local criminal bodies from her ability to disguise acids and poisons as more legitimate and helpful mixtures. She calls herself WesternGate, as a reference to her position as a gateway to freedom for many slaves
ShackleKey the Gnoll is the head officer of the town guard. From his office in the tower in the centre of town, he administrates the town guards people, and works to obtain equipment and uniforms for those under his stewardship. Old for a gnoll, and covered in a patchwork of scars, his traditionalism occasionally clashes with the town council, and his dedication to law and order has him conflict with local underworld figures.
Tuskbreak is a refined, well-groomed orcish gentleman. He is reserved and quiet, bringing little attention to himself. Never seen without darkly-hued magesight glasses and simple, but refined linens. Earthy tones that blend almost into invisibility with how plain they are. He insists that his interests are legitimate, but his relationship with WesternGate and other para-legal and criminal groups imply something less than legal.
While not a resident of Stormsword’s Rest, Broken Axe is another Orc who frequents the settlement, as a personal guest of General Stormsword. A liason between Commonwealth and Orcish armies, and former seperatist leader. He is advanced in age, and has a great deal of knowledge and experience he willingly shares at the military academy. The two have a history of conflict. He dresses in the fashion of a pre-commonwealth orcish leader, wearing white hair and scars proudly.

#### Notable Locations

Naturally, the Manor in the centre of town is a prominent location. Sitting on the top of the slight rise in the township, it stands three stories tall, the first story’s walls made of smoothly worked stone, merging seamlessly into the walls of the tower it’s built into. The tower itself is nearly five floors tall, a prominent elevation that allows the flame at it’s top to be viewed and used for navigation through the mountain pass. A cellar with openings into the subterranean sections of the town is hewn into the earth and stone, used for storage and kitchens for the manor above. The ground floor is dominated by council chambers and administrative offices of the town.
Upstairs, the manor is divided much like any normal manor would be, the first floor serving as a meeting hall, with access to a large dining chamber and library and study for the Marchess’es use. The third floor has bedrooms and personal chambers, and then the attic where the family’s assistants find their own chambers. The tower serves as a guard’s barracks, as well as a seperated cellar used to house criminals and drunks brought in by the guardsmen. ShackleKey’s office is on the ground floor, as is much of the administrative space the guard needs. Storage for town guard equipment is further upstairs.
The town square is built on the main road through the town. In front of the gatehouse in the wall seperating the manor and it’s lush gardens from the rest of the town. It is surrounded by the workers’ union halls, and beyond those, the workshops and warehouses of the inner walls, wide streets allowing the easy transport of goods.
The university is an older attachment, built atop a retaining wall as tall as the inner circle of walls, it’s wide, planned grid of walkways and streets between stately and finely-worked buildings. A mountain path leads up the steep valley wall to the top of the valley lip, to find an observatory, built up deliberately to protect the vulnerable telescopes. The thin, treacherous path is difficult for elder lecturers to traverse, but telepresence magics allow them to teach astrology and astronomy in the early mornings.
A large university library and taxonomical collection allows for a wide body of reference for study, and proximity to the workshops in the town below means that metallurgy and geology can be studied and developed by students and natural philosophers alike. The university is somewhat limited in studies of theology, though it still offers such courses, it is more known for it’s physical and philosophical studies.
The military academy to the south is more developed on it’s own artificial landing. More recently constructed, to modern design and architecture. Theorycrafting and developing new magic and technological methods of warfare, while teaching the new generations of drake officers historic campaigns and allowing them to study and reference the generals of old.
On the far eastern edge of the town’s holdings, the very outer layer of orchards and farms, is the Stormsmaiden Stables, A prominent breeder and dealer of Dancing Hawks, administrated by the Marchess herself as a business interest and investment. Known for supplying Hawks to the commonwealth military, the stables are large and well appointed, with a variety of harsh, rocky and uneven terrains for the hawks to mimic, as much as possible, their native terrain. There is a small population of prey animals for the hawks to naturally chase and attack, encouraging play and natural activity.
In the town proper, in a tangle of buildings and alleyways, is a suprisingly large inn. A bustling set of detached rooms behind a small garden nearly built-over by it’s neighbours. It’s often busy, and notably never visited by the town guard, except in the most dire of situations. It is kept clean, well-maintained. Colourful decorations and brightly painted tables and cups. It’s relatively safe, thanks to the watchful eye of the [northern pass crime family], and is a guaranteed place to reach their representative in town. The Burrow is also open for business to house adventurers and travellers, if they find the place. But more reputable inns dot the market square and town square.

#### Local Spirits

Likely the most notable local Spirit, and certainly the most bizarre, is Child-Of-The-Fallen-Star.
The spirit is of roughly humanoid appearance, but confusing nature.
Its features are elongated and stretched, far out of Human proportion, with its digits being particularly long and thick; it also lacks a nose and ears.
Despite its presumed deafness and alien nature, it has a quick wit and keen, almost preternatural insight; and its subtle and inhuman expressions betray a vast, alien intelligence.
It is a patron of knowledge and exploration: it is propitiated by the people of the city learning new lessons, methods, and sciences; it encourages learning, effort, and investigation; and it often whispers of discoveries yet to come.
It will say almost nothing of its origin; it is noted that it frequents the university and its attached observatory, although it doesn't seem terribly focused on any particular science.

The Brothers are sibling spirits whose Bassins are the two main mountain peaks to the north and south of the pass, with each spirit being tied to a particular peak.
There is a strong sibling rivalry between them, over whose mountain is the greater; they throw rocks and cause landslides down the slopes of their respective mountain, in order to widen the bases and make their realms appear larger.
They are celebrated yearly in a festival that merely asks them to be careful, and not destroy the township between them, or block the road.

Howl-of-The-Earth is a spirit of the winds that carry through the valley.
They are a gracious spirit, associated with safe travel; they often help those who propitiate them by providing guidance through the narrow, winding pass, and have been known to lead rescue parties through the pass to those who have met trouble.
They are also thought to bring good luck, especially in winter; in particular, shephards in the highlands around the town also make offerings to them, hoping for advanced warnings of threats and favorable weather.

#### Neighbours

Drahrat have been seen frequenting the town. There are no known drahrat caverns broaching the Northland Corridor, but this is not unusual for the secretive deep-explorer dwarves.
The Northland Corridor leads to what can be considered almost a ‘sister’ city on the orcish end of the Corridor. They have their own undying flame, and the halfway point of the Corridor can see both flames from a prominence off to one side of the path, aiding in navigation.
To the east, the Dragonshire stretches out, with smaller farming villages tens of demarc along the roads. More fertile, softer ground allowing more variety of farmed plants, feeding Stormsword’s Rest with both food, and plant matter for brewing into potions and alcohol. A large proportion of these villages are populated by Gnolls and Drakes.
[Further neighbours and relationships to be decided]

### Major Spirit: The Bullrush God

**Basin:** Unknown.  It was able to manipulate Dragon eggs to create the Drakes, and it apparently has use of land and a title.

**Manifestation:** Unknown, as it almost never manifests.  It appeared to Karrach in the form of a Drake.

**Propitiation:** Unknown, as it almost never seeks or accepts offerings.  The price it asked of Karrach was several *demarc* of marshland and a noble title.

**Binds:** None known.

The spirit responsible for the creation of the Drakes referred to itself with a number of names, among them *the Bulrush God*, *the Rainstorm Shepherd* and *the Osprey’s Father*.
After Karrach began searching for a spirit that would aid him in the creation of a *people*, the Bulrush God approached him in the form of a Drake; it offered him a people in that image, in exchange only for a stretch of swampland and a noble title.
Karrach met his price, and the Drakes were created.

It is unknown why the Bulrush God wanted to own a marsh — or why it cared if Karrach recognized that ownership, if that area had already been its Basin, as some claim; nor is there any obvious reason why a Great Spirit should want to also be a Count.
It is unknown if it has any wants, rituals, or binds; it is also unknown what its basin is, although it is clearly such that the Bullrush God could aid in the creation of the Drakes.
Since being granted its title and domain, it has sought no further contact with mortals, and has made no further desires known.

The Dragonshire zealously guards the territory granted to the Bulrush God, even though it did not specifically tell them to do so, out of concern for what it *might* do should its lands be invaded; when dealing with a spirit as powerful and mysterious as the Bulrush God, such precautions are wise.

