# Common Races

The following races have large populations, and can be found throughout the Commonwealth.
Most of these races take pride in belonging to one or both of the following groups:

- The "founding races," the races that founded the Commonwealth: that is, Humans, Gnolls, and Halflings.
- The "pillar races," the major racial and cultural groups that dominate the Commonwealth today: that is, Drakes, (Ash) Elves, Gnolls, Humans, and Kobolds.

### Drakes

  - Though it was long known that the Drakes where a created people, it
    was only a few hundred years ago, as power devolved to the people in
    the Dragonshire and as their alliance with the Commonwealth drew
    closer, that their true origin was revealed.

  - More than a century before the Old Charter, after Karrach claimed a
    swath of the Empire of Man, it had become apparent to him that he
    could not govern such a large territory on his own.
    
      - He had called other dragons to him, to share the rule of his
        kingdom as his lords and vassals, but dragons, though long-lived
        and mighty, where also few, and had little shared culture or
        history before his kingdom. Karrach need a *people*.

  - Karrach, aided by the dragons who answered his call, began a search
    for a powerful spirit willing to provide him a great boon — for a
    great price.
    
      - Ultimately, a spirit contacted him; it variably identified itself as *the Bulrush God*, *the Rainstorm Shepherd* and *the Osprey’s Father*, and it dwelt within the southern reaches of the Dragonshire.
      - The spirit’s actual basin remains unknown, as does the extent of
        its powers; they are certainly great, given what it did.
      - It gave Karrach and his followers instructions for creating holy
        sites — only the precious first few of which it has actually
        blessed — and a ritual they could perform there. The ritual would
        convert a dragon’s egg into a drake’s egg — drakes being creatures
        of dragon’s blood and kind, but smaller, less mighty and far
        more fertile.
      - The price the Bulrush God demanded was perhaps surprisingly
        cheap for what it did: it demanded ownership of a stretch of
        lowland marsh on the southern coast of the Dragonshire, fully 20
        kilometers along the coast and extending 7 kilometers inland,
        and a lordly title.
      - This represented an enormous risk for Karrach, as he knew of no
        way to bind the spirit, which was unknown to him.

  - The Bulrush God is still worshiped in the Dragonshire.
    
      - The Bulrush God is enigmatic; very little is known about it,
        neither its actual basin nor the true extent of its powers nor
        its ultimate goals.
      - The Bulrush God answers very few supplicants; it is not known
        what draws it. No bind for it is known — unsurprisingly, for a
        spirit of its power.
      - Conversely, the Bulrush God interferes little in the affairs of
        mortals and lesser spirits. Particularly, it has never used its
        lordly title, and it has not allowed settlement of the land it
        claims, and so has no subjects. (Neither has it forbidden the
        land to hunters or travelers, leading many to wonder what its
        actual intent with it was.)

  - Drakes frequently trace their lineages back to their Dragon
    forebears.
    
      - Each egg needed to be live; thus, all Drakes have at least two
        dragon ancestors, one male and one female.
      - The ritual to transform an egg required a price of each
        participant dragon; it was not undertaken lightly.
      - Though Drakes can nominally be broken into clans based on their
        lineage, their family trees where often rendered *complex* by
        feudal politics; for some, their clan and heritage are important
        parts of who they are; other drakes care little — or may not even
        know their ancestry at all.
      - Many Drake clans (or smaller noble families) claim noble titles
        and land-holdings — at least in principle.

  - In the early days of the Dragonshire, when they were a feudal
    territory (and most of the feudal lords were dragons), Drakes tended
    to take positions of authority, above Humans but below Dragons.

  - As political reforms took place, the role of Drakes, Dragons and
    Human leaders changed. The modern Dragonshire is a Commonwealth
    province, and power has been devolved from the hereditary nobility
    (of Drakes and Dragons) to civil Councils.

  - Still, Drakes largely think of themselves as being of “noble blood”,
    and many of them still hold hereditary titles – which may or may not
    be of practical significance.

  - Even though power in the Dragonshire has been devolved to civil
    councils, having the right lineage still helps: Drakes commonly hold
    positions of privilege and authority in the Dragonshire.

  - Because their culture is similar to that of the feudal Kingdoms of
    Man, Drakes find it fairly easy to interact politically with that
    neighboring state.

  - Drakes commonly serve in units of the Commonwealth Military that
    draw from the citizenry of the Dragonshire

  - Somewhat like Gnolls, Drakes also commonly take up jobs where their
    immense strength is an asset. However, because Drakes are much more
    comfortable in large cities, this tends to mean “blacksmithing” more
    often than it means “farm work”.

  - Drakes tend to be good-natured and sociable at best, but also brash,
    proud and stubborn at worst.

  - Appearance: Drakes are humanoid in gross layout, but they have the
    head, long tail, powerful limbs, tough scales and sharp claws of
    Dragons.

> **Chandra** [Drake, Social General, our host]: Well, since we're assembled at my manor, I suppose it's only fair we discuss my kind first.
>
> **Trac** [Commonwealth soldier, Gnoll]: So long as the drinks keep coming.
>
> **River**: What should we discuss? Obviously, military prowess would put a shine on your scales.
>
> **Chandra**: Swordsmanship, too. But We were made for it. At least our court and cities we made ourselves. And our membership in the commonwealth has only made us better.

#### Drake Vitals
    
- Old Age: 100 Years
- Average Height: 2.4m
- Average Weight: 110kg
- Diet: Omnivore (preferential carnivore)

- DUR 40, STR 40
- \+5 SAV, +5 SOM, +10 WIL
- Movement: Foot 4/12
- Senses: Normal, Infra-Red
- Size: Medium, *Great Stature*
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Dragon-Kin, Drake
- Language Group: DDK, HHED
- Scales: +2 Armor

#### Cultural Item: Dragonshire Wyrmblade

A type of massive sword unique to the Dragonshire, Wyrmblades are designed to take advantage of the natural strength and reach of Drakes, and to be effective when used in combination with the pole-arms of smaller races.
The name refers to a snake-like undulation incorporated into the blade.

Tags: Two-handed, Heavy, Bladed, Difficult, Reach, Close, Defensive, Parry, Oversized

Damage: 2d10+3+DB

AP: 4

Special: Oversized.  Users without the *Great Stature* tag take -10 to their attack check and deal -2 DB.

#### Optional Trait: Chroma

Though Drakes come in vibrant colors and hues, most have not inherited the particular magical natures of Dragons; you, however, have.

- **Effect**: the character gains *Resistance: \[Tag\] (DV÷2, +WIL to checks to resist)* for one of the following *tags*:
  - Chemical
  - Cold
  - Disease
  - Electricity
  - Fire.

#### Optional Trait: Dragon’s Flight
    
Dragons have a wide variety of modes of motion, and you have inherited one of them.

- **Effect**: The character gains one of the following movement modes:
  - Swim 3/15
  - Burrow 2/6
  - Fly 3/15/45

#### Optional Power: Breath Weapon
    
You have inherited the ability to breathe fire — or some other dangerous substance.

- **Effect**:  You gain one of the following effects, depending on the power’s *type*:
  - Chemical: you can spit a toxic spray.
    You gain the following attack:
    - Indicate-Only Attack, Splash 1D10 ÷ 3 m. Range 10m short / 20m long.
    - Tags: Natural, Chemical
    - Covered opponents suffer 1D10 ÷ 2 DV a turn; the chemical can be washed off with water (a standard action requiring a source of water).
  - Cold: you can hurl an icy spear.
    You gain the following attack:
    - Indicate-Only Attack, 1D10+2+DB DV, AP -4.
    - Tags: Natural, Cold, Ice
  - Disease: You can launch a small bundle of bone-like spines infected with a deadly plague.
    You gain the following attack:
    - Indicate-Only Attack, 1D10 ÷ 2 DV, AP -3;
    - Tags: Natural, Disease.
    - If you deal DV, then your target is exposed to the disease.
  - Electricity: you can deliver powerful electric shocks.
    Your unarmed attacks (and natural weapons, should you have any) deal an additional 1D10 damage and gain the Electric tag.
  - Fire: you can breath fire. You gain the following attack:
    - Indicate-Only Attack, 1D10+DB DV, AP -, Blast.
    - Tags: Natural, Fire.
- **Special**: This power has a *Tag* to represent the type of breath-weapon you have.
  If you took the *Chroma* trait, then the tag is the one you chose for your resistance; otherwise, the tag is *Fire*.

#### Optional Background: Dragonshire Noble

You hail from a noble bloodline in the Dragonshire.
Though actual rule now rests in the hands of the House of Commons, having the right ancestors is still *useful*.

- 10 ranks in Protocol
- 10 ranks on one other *Social* skill
- 10 ranks in one *Combat* skill
- Either the *Noble* Class or the *Officer* Class.
  If you select the *Officer* Class, you must later purchase the Soldier class during character creation, to meet its prerequisites.

### Elves

  - Elves are a common people throughout the Emerald Plains.

  - Elves are humanoid in gross layout, although they have finer
    features (including long, pointed ears).
    
      - Elves have excellent hearing and vision.
      - Notably, elves are descended from arboreal creatures, and retain
        prehensile feet. These are larger than human feet, owing to
        being reinforced with extra tendons, bones and musculature;
        thanks to this reinforcement, Elves can run on open ground as
        well as humans.
      - Elves also have exotic skin pigmentations, which help them to
        blend in to natural environments.

  - There are three major Elven ethnic groups: Wood Elves, Shade Elves
    and Ash Elves.

  - Wood Elves are a tribal culture, dispersed throughout the
    northwestern portion of the Emerald Plane.
    
      - Wood Elves do not have a large, overarching nation; their tribes
        are usually more similar to nearby tribes of other races than to
        distant Wood Elves.
      - The Commonwealth’s interactions with wood elves have, for the
        most part, been peaceful; by the present day, the majority of
        the wood elf tribes have signed the Commonwealth Charter (and
        now the Commonwealth Compact).
      - However, most wood elf communities continue to practice
        traditional, tribal ways of life; they live within the vast
        interior swaths of the Emerald Plane, having little contact with
        outsiders, even though they are technically Commonwealth
        citizens.
      - Because of this, wood elves are rarely seen outside of their
        tribal communities.
      - Wood Elves typically live in small settlements, with a few
        planted fields around them. The able-bodied typically herd or
        hunt, while the very young, the very old and the infirm live in
        their settlements.
      - Wood Elves have a complex skin pattern, a little like an ocelot.
        Their bellies, underarms and inner thighs are a dull white,
        while their backs, arms and legs are a dark green. Running
        through this is a complex pattern of black spots and folding and
        curving lines. Their hair is often dark green or black; rarely,
        it is gold or orange.

  - Shade Elves are plains raiders hailing from the open plains on the
    southwest of the Emerald Plane.
    
      - Before the arrival of the Commonwealth, they preyed on the
        peoples and cultures near them, forcing some to pay tribute and
        raiding the others without mercy.
      - As the Commonwealth spread West and entered the Shade Elves’
        territory, some of the tribes they had preyed upon allied with
        those Commonwealth settlers.
      - The Commonwealth built a string of walled cities and fortified
        keeps on the path to the sea; after a disastrous siege led to a
        losing war, the Shade Elves’ territory was severely restricted.
      - This left the Shade Elves vulnerable to the Leapers, a
        subterranean race that overwhelmed their largest settlements and
        forced the Shade Elves to pay them tribute.
      - The Leapers later forced the Shade Elves to cooperate with their
        other tributaries, the Ratfolk of the Warren Isles; the
        resulting union came to be called the Shaded Sea Peoples, named
        for the sea that separated the Warren Isles from the Shade
        Elves’ territory on the southwest of the continent.
      - Shade Elves are still raiders, striking at settlements on the
        edge of the Commonwealth and on the northwest of the Raptor’s
        Plane.
      - They also participate in piracy, carried by Ratfolk ships and
        sailors.
      - As members of the Shaded Sea Peoples, they are one of the
        Emerald Plane’s great powers, and an enemy of the Commonwealth.
        They have been in conflict with the Commonwealth off-and-on for
        centuries.
      - Shade Elves live in small settlements dug into the bases of
        hills and the sides of mesas and river-valleys. Their
        settlements are usually fortified and walled, both to help
        fending of rebellions by their tributaries and predation at the
        hands of other Shade Elf clans.
      - Shade Elven skin is striped, a little like a tiger or zebra. The
        stripes alternate between a dark black and a dull grey. Shade
        Elven hair is similarly black and grey.

  - Ash Elves are urban, thoughtful and philosophical people; they are
    the descendants of Shade and Ash Elves who settled in the Haven
    Isles.
    
      - Many trace the origins of the Ash Elves to the siege of
        Islandholme by the Shade Elves in CY 447 and its aftermath, as
        Shade Elves taken hostage in the siege where slowly ingtegrated
        into the Commonwealth and interbred with Wood Elves.
      - Ash Elven settlements have also absorbed many refugees from the
        tumult and cruelty of Shade Elven culture, and have served as a
        familiar home for Wood Elves wishing to join a more urban
        culture.
      - Ash Elven culture was formed in the cities of the Haven Isles,
        influenced by the countless other traditions brought there by
        settlers from the rest of the Commonwealth.
      - Ash Elves are a very thoughtful people, and they are avid
        consumers of literature, art, law, philosophy, and other forms
        of scholarship. They also tend to be highly eclectic in the
        scholarship they consume, drawing for the intellectual
        traditions of races and cultures throughout the commonwealth.
      - Ash Elven culture is disciplined, mindful and meditative; they
        are often reserved, stoic in the face of danger, but vibrant and
        joyous in time of celebration.
      - Ash Elves tend to prefer urban environs, and can be found
        throughout the Commonwealth’s large cities.
      - Ash Elves have also built cities of their own; they tend to
        build large underground settlements, somewhat like those
        constructed by Dwarves and Kobolds.
      - Ash Elven culture is open, egalitarian and libertine; guests are
        welcome and well-treated, and they tend to get along well with
        their neighbors — especially dwarves and kobolds.
      - They are particularly known for the joyous celebrations that
        mark their holidays, in which their cities are brightly
        decorated and travelers and neighbors are welcome.
      - Ash Elves tend to be strong advocates for the Commonwealth’s
        continued peaceful expansion.
      - Ash Elven skin is mostly the color of ash, as the name implies;
        they have a few stripes along their backs, the tops of their
        arms, and the outside of their legs. The stripes are thing, and
        alternate between white and black. Their hair is often black,
        ash grey, pale white or ember orange.

#### Elven Vitals

- Old Age: 160 Years
- Average Height: 180cm
- Average Weight: 50kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 25, STR 25
- \+5 COO +5 WIL +10 INT
- Movement: Foot 5 / 15
- Senses: Normal, Low-Light
- Size: Medium
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Elf
- Language Group: HHED
- *Keen Senses*: Elves receive +20 to visual Perception checks, and +10 to auditory perception checks.
- Prehensile Feet: Elves have prehensile feet.
  This allows them to grip and manipulate objects with their feet as adroitly as they do with their hands.
  This is of particular use while climbing and grappling, applying a +20 bonus to those tests.
  It's also particularly useful when *riding*, and it makes them very difficult to *dismount*.
  - Elves treat their feet as non-dominant limbs, so they need to purchase the Ambidextrous trait at least once to wield weapons with them without taking a penalty.
- Natural Camouflage: Elves have complex skin patterns, which serve as camouflage.
  These patterns provide a +10 benefit to Stealth checks; this benefit is lost if their skin is covered, and is not cumulative with worn camouflage.

#### Cultural Item: Clan Sword

Clan Swords are wooden weapons used by many Wood Elves.
They are carefully hewn from sturdy hardwood, and finished with designs unique to the tribe that produced them.
Clan Swords arc like inverted sabres; have a narrow, diamond-like cross-section; and are weighted towards the very tip.
They almost always feature leather or linen lanyards to secure the weapon to the wielder's hand.

Tags: One-handed, Easy, Blunt, Secure, Well Suited: Maim, Well Suited: Mighty Blow

Damage: 1d10+3+DB

AP: 1

#### Optional Background: Ash Elven Undercity

You hail from one of the Ash-Elven undercities beneath the low peaks of the Haven Isles.

- 10 ranks in Control
- 10 ranks in one Art field skill
- 10 ranks in one *Technical* skill
- the Resilient trait

#### Optional Background: Shade Elf Raider

You grew up among the most feared mounted raiders that the Emerald Plains has ever seen.

- 10 ranks in one Combat skill
- 10 ranks in Ride
- 10 ranks in Survival
- one weapon (of Cost: Medium)
- one Survival skill kit.
- the Hardened (witnessing and performing cruelty) neutral trait.
- Special: Shade Elves don't receive one dot in Common the way that most charactesr do.  Instead, they receive one dot in Shaded Sea Common.  They usually speak Keillou (Language Group HHED) natively.

#### Optional Background: Wood Elf Tribal Commuity

You are from one of the ancient, pre-urban Elven cultures living to the west of the Worldspine.

- 10 ranks in Fray
- 10 ranks in Ranged Weapons
- 10 ranks in Stealth
- 10 ranks in Survival

### Gnolls

Gnolls are one of the most numerous races on the Emerald Plane; much like Humans and Elves, they have long lived throughout the Emerald Plane.
Almost as sociable as humans and incredibly strong, Gnollish strength (and endurance) was the backbone of the early Commonwealth.

Gnolls are roughly humanoid in gross layout, but they have hyena-like features:
their head and feet are much like a hyena's;
they are covered in short, ochre fur much like a hyena's;
and they have a hyena's short tail.
Gnolls are also much larger and stronger than most other races — Drakes are perhaps the only common race that can exceed them.
Notably, Gnolls display less sex dimorphism than most other races do; as a result, Gnollish cultures tend to place less importance on an individual's sex.

Gnolls where one of the three races that cooperated under the auspices of the Old Charter to create the growing, prosperous culture of towns, manors and cities that would eventually become the Commonwealth.
When Gnollish refugees where granted a manor's charter by the Lord of a Human city, a new and unique culture was created, at least as similar to the urban Human culture that sheltered them as to any prior Gnollish culture;
this Gnollish culture was one of the ones that was spread west as the Commonwealth expanded, and that is still one of the Commonwealth's most common and distinctive cultures today.

Commonwealth Gnolls tend to be somewhat rural; they are common in the small villages and towns of the Commonwealth, but rare in its cities.
Though the idea of a Gnollish farmer may seem odd to some, they are in fact well-suited to it; their great strength and endurance is invaluable for farming work, and the *flexibility* of their diet can be invaluable in lean years.
(Though Gnolls are meat-eaters, they have discovered a number of useful recipes involving grains that provide them at least some nourishment, which they can use to greatly stretch meat reserves.)

Though Gnolls may be somewhat rustic by Commonwealth standards, their communities nevertheless tend to be open and welcoming;
their ancestor's flight from persecution at the hands of their cousins, and their salvation at the hands of people strange and alien to them — Humans — is very much alive in Gnollish culture, and strongly informs their traditions and values to this day.

Gnolls put quite a lot of effort into getting along with members of other communities, and will go out of their way to make other races feel comfortable around them.
Many Gnollish communities have two separate set of customs, one for when members of other races are around, and one for when they're not.
For example, Gnolls are carrion-eaters, and many other races may be revolted by some of the things that Gnolls may eat; for this reason, Gnollish communities often have a recipe of "guest-food," which both they and their guests can eat.
Gnolls are also aware of how savage and intimidating they can appear to be, so many of them put quite a lot of effort into developing refined personal styles: fine clothing, subtle jewelry, neat cuts of hair and mane, and died fur are all common.
Gnolls also commonly use veils to hide their predator's jaws from those who they do not with to frighten or intimidate.

Not every Commonwealth Gnoll stays in the small town where they are born.
Many Gnollish families have a long military tradition, and Gnolls make up almost two-thirds of the Commonwealth military's ranks.

Since the first Gnollish manors were settled besides Halfling neighbors, the two races have cooperated closely; Gnolls have long found employment with Halfling trade-caravans as guards.
To this day, many Halfling communities are located next to Gnollish ones, and clans of Halflings and Gnolls may have traditions of cooperation that go back centuries.
Gnolls that travel with Halfling caravans are often more urbane than their cousins; they are also more likely to go to great lengths to perfect a personal style that is just intimidating enough to scare off the wrong sort, without disturbing the paying customers as well!

There are also a number of Gnollish tribal communities in the territory to the west of the Worldspine Mountains.
Notably, much like their symbiosis with Humans and Halflings in the east, several Gnollish tribes allied with Herder communities in the west, where the frail Herders greatly valued them for their physical strength; this alliance became a force to be reckoned with in the west, and was the major opponent to the Shade Elves prior to the coming of the Commonwealth.

There is also a unique ethnic group of Gnolls hailing from stretch of snowy northland that lies to the east of the Worldspine mountains.
White-furred and adapted to the cold, these Gnolls have long lived on the snowy terrain above and around the subterranean holds of Dwarves, with whom they have long coexisted amicably; Snow Gnolls are expert hunters and herders, and they provide Dwarven holds with an invaluable source of meat.
Though few in numbers, the combination of these stealthy hunters scattered throughout the northern forests with the extreme resilience of Dwarven holds handily prevented the conquest of the North by the Empire of Man, and later by the Kingdoms of Men.

#### Gnollish Vitals

- Old Age: 50 Years
- Average Height: 2.2m
- Average Weight: 80kg
- Diet: Obligate Carnivore (scavenger)

- Gnolls are one of the three founding races of the Commonwealth, and prosper anywhere great strength and endurance are valuable.
- DUR 35, STR 35
- \+5 COG, +5 INT, +5 SAV, +5 SOM
- Movement: Foot 5 / 15
- Senses: Normal, Low-Light, Scent
- Size: Medium, *Great Stature*
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Gnoll
- Language Group: GR
- *Sturdy*: Gnolls are highly resistant to pain and injury.
  Gnolls can Negate one Wound.
- *Powerful Jaws*: Gnolls have fierce teeth and powerful jaws.
  They have the following natural weapon:
  - Bite: Unarmed Attack, 1D10+4+DB DV, AP 1.
  - Tags: Natural, *Bone-Crushing*, *Grab*
- *Disease-Resistant*: Gnolls have an incredible resistance to many diseases.
  They have Resistance: Disease (+30 to checks to resist)

#### Optional Background: Military Family

You hail from one of the many Gnollish military families.

- 10 ranks in Fray
- 10 ranks in two other Combat skills
- the Soldier class

#### Optional Background: Caravan Guard

Continuing a way of life that stretches back more than 700 years, you travel with Halfling trade-caravans, serving as a guard, a bouncer, a hand, and a diplomat.

- 10 ranks in Intimidate
- 10 ranks in Perception
- 10 ranks in Persuasion
- 10 ranks in Survival

#### Optional Neutral Trait: Cold-Adapted

Your ancestors have long dwelled in the snowy north, and you are well adapted to the cold — although you suffer somewhat in warmer lands.

- You gain Resistance: Cold and Vulnerability: Heat.

### Humans

- Social, dextrous and intelligent, Humans where the first race to build cities, and the first to build great nations.
- Humans are also known for the great endurance; while many other races' energy ebbs and flows, humans can maintain a steady walking pace over great distances.
  They are also fare more resistant to shock than many other races are.
- Even today, Humans are widely renowned for their manual dexterity, for their society-building social instincts and their problem-solving abilities.
- One of the three founding races (besides Gnolls and Halflings), Humans are widely regarded as the “social problem-solvers” who helped bind together all the widely different communities that came together to form the early Commonwealth.
- Humans are frequently academics, professionals, scholars, lawyers and politicians.
- Humans are common in the small towns of Heartland and Dragonshire, and are common in cities everywhere.
  And, of course, are the principle race of the Kingdoms of Man.

#### Human Vitals

One of the Commonwealth's three Founding Races.
Intelligent, dextrous and social, humans are the engineers of the Commonwealth–building everything from wagons to societies.

- Old Age: 60 years
- Average Height: 1.7m
- Average Weight: 60kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 30, STR 30
- \+5 COG, +5 COO, +10 SAV
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal
- Size: Medium
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Human
- Language Group: HHED
- Social Animals: Humans gain the Social Animal trait.
- Inexhaustible: Humans gain +WIL to *Feat of Endurance* checks.

### Kobolds

  - Kobolds are a relatively new addition to the Commonwealth; most
    Kobold communities trace their origins to a mass exodus from the
    Kingdom of Man roughly 200 years ago.

  - Kobolds are sociable, creative, and very quick.

  - Kobold culture is very family- and community-oriented

  - Extended families tend to live together in large homes, and several
    families will cluster together to form a block.

  - Kobolds communities tend to have small personal spaces and large
    public spaces; Kobolds tend to take enormous pride the quality of
    their public spaces, which will commonly be excellently maintained,
    and will feature impressive monuments or natural landscapes.

  - Kobolds have a short lifespan, but they also tend to have large
    families; because of this, they have grown explosively
    
      - even though they were absorbed only recently, many of the
        largest Commonwealth city-states are underground Kobold
        metropolises.

  - They tend to live near Dwarves and Ash Elves, both of which are very
    long-lived. This can create some complex relationships: it is not
    uncommon for one Dwarf or Elf to closely befriend several
    generations of one Kobold family in succession, watching each
    generation come into adulthood, have children and pass away – an
    arrangement that can be very bittersweet for the Dwarf or Ash Elf
    involved.

  - Kobold culture strongly encourages industry, so Kobold communities
    tend to be highly productive.

  - They look like tiny, slender, bipedal dragons. Somewhat like Drakes, their
    scales can take on a range of colors, and often metallic hues;
    however, unlike Drakes, this rarely has any effect on the Kobold in
    question.
    
      - Like Drakes and Dragons, and unlike other reptiles, Kobolds are
        warm-blooded.
      - Kobolds aren’t mammals; they don’t have mammary glands, and they
        have internal genitalia. Because of this, Kobolds can have very
        different ideas about what constitutes “appropriate attire”.

#### Kobold Vitals

Clever, quick, industrious and sociable, Kobolds make up the majority of the underground cities.

- Old Age: 40 Years
- Average Height: 1m
- Average Weight: 25kg
- Diet: Omnivore (preferential carnivore)

- DUR 25, STR 20
- \+5 INT, +10 COO, +5 SAV
- Movement: Foot 5 / 15
- Senses: Normal, Infrared
- Size: Small
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Dragon-Kin, Kobold
- Language Group: DDK
- *Scales*: Kobolds have +1 Armor

#### Optional Trait: Kroma

Though the blood of Dragons is thin in Kobolds, it does sometimes manifest itself.

- **Effect**: the character gains *Resistance: \[Tag\] (DV÷2, +WIL to checks to resist)* to one of the following tags:
  - Chemical
  - Cold
  - Disease
  - Electricity
  - Fire

#### Optional Trait: Dragon’s Bite

Though you don’t possess a Dragon’s breath, you have inherited (some of) their natural weapons, and they can be infused with a Dragon’s fire — or some other elemental type.

- **Effect**: The character gain the following *natural weapons*:
  - Bite:
    - Unarmed Attack, 1D10+2+DB DV, AP -
    - Tags: Natural, *your type*
  - Claws:
    - Unarmed Attack, 1D10+DB DV, AP -2
    - Tags: Natural, *your yype*
- **Special**: Your *natural weapons* have a type.
  - If you have the *Chroma* trait, then your type is the type you chose for Chroma;
  - if you don’t, your type is *Fire*.
- You gain an additional effect, based on your *Type*:
  - Chemical: your claws and bite are toxic.
    Any creature you hit with either attack is *covered*, and thereafter takes 2 DV a turn.
    Water can wash the corrosive off (requiring a source of water and a Standard Action).
  - Cold: your natural attack gains -2 AP, and you can drain heat from anything you hold, bite into or breath on.
  - Disease: your claws, bite and saliva carry the following disease:
  - Electricity: your claws and bite deliver powerful shocks.
    Anyone you strike or bite must make a DUR+WIL check or be stunned for 5 turns.
  - Fire: your claws or bite are incredibly hot.
    Your attack does +3 DB, and you can set flammable objects on fire.

### Shifters

  - Shifters live in communities in the tribal territories; they are
    rare elsewhere.

  - Most shifter communities exist in tribal territories. Though most
    Shifter communities signed the Commonwealth Charter long ago, in
    practice, they have established few entanglements with outside
    communities.

  - Though not exactly insular, because they do not generally produce
    goods for export, they are not generally able to import goods from
    other communities, and so they tend to have little contact with
    other races.

  - Notably, Shifter communities tend to be very conservative. They are
    wary of outsiders, and are happy to live their lives much as they
    always have, and be left alone.

  - Small numbers of Shifters filter out of the tribal communities,
    seeking the exotic experiences the rest of the Commonwealth has to
    offer.

  - While there are a few Shifter manors, and some cities host notable
    Shifter populations, Shifters who leave the tribal territories often
    find themselves alone in their community, the only shifter in the
    town or village where they settle. Because of this, shifters outside
    the tribal territories tend to adopt the culture of the community
    they settle in.
    
      - Many shifters are not particularly social, so this often does
        not bother them as much as it might bother members of other
        species.

  - Shifters often find work that suits their personal inclinations,
    among the communities that they settle in; “their own inclination”
    is often affected by the tendencies of their hybrid form.

  - Appearance: In humanoid form, shifters somewhat resemble elves and
    humans. An individual shifter will often display traits appropriate
    to their hybrid form.

#### Shifter Vitals

Half elf, half human, half wild, Shifters can *shift* between humanoid and hybrid forms.

- Old Age: 90 Years
- Average Height: 1.8m
- Average Weight: 50kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 30, STR 30
- \+5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SOM
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal, Low-Light
- Size: Medium
- Tags: Supernatural, Humanoid, Human, Elf, Shape-Shifter, Shifter
- Language Group: HHED (humanoid form); GR (hybrid form)
- *Hybrid*: You have two forms: Humanoid and Hybrid.
  - The specific details of each form are fixed.
    That is, your Humanoid form, for example, looks the same every time you *shift* to it; you can't determine what it looks like each time you shift.
    You can shift between forms at will; changing forms is a *Standard Action*.
    - In Humanoid form, you have a mixture of Human and (Wood) Elvish features.
    - In Hybrid from, you are roughly humanoid, but with the features of an animal.
  - When in *hybrid form*, you gain two of the following benefits (chosen when you create your character):
    - Claws: you have claws that do 2d10 DV, at -2 AP.
    - Teeth: You have a predator’s jaw, which allows you to bite foes.
      The bite does 1d10+2 DV at -2 AP.
      When you bite someone, if you score an Excellent Success, you may choose to *latch on*; this normally works like grappling the target.
    - Hearing: You have superb hearing, gaining +20 on auditory Perception checks.
    - Movement: you gain one of the following movement modes (in addition to your other movement modes):
      - Burrow 1/3
      - Climb 3/9
      - Flight 3/9/36
      - Glide 4/12/48
      - Hop 4/12
      - Swim 3/9
    - Scent: you have a superb sense of smell; you gain the Scent sense.
    - Environment Adaptation: choose a hostile environment; you gain an adaptation that allows you to survive this environment.
      For example, you might choose to survive in extreme cold, and thus gain a blubber layer.
    - Motion-Sensitivity: your vision becomes very sensitive to motion.
      You gain +10 to Perception tests made against moving targets.
    - Sprinter: choose one movement mode and increase it by +1/+3 (for example, Walking 4/12 would become Walking 5/15).
    - Thick Hide: You gain +1 armor.
- *Fast-Healing*: you have Fast Healing 1

#### Optional Trait: Animal Form.

Some shifters, in addition to their *hybrid* form, can entirely assume the form of an animal.

- **Effect**: you can assume the form of an animal.
  - Your animal form resembles a normal member of the animal that your hybrid form was based on.
  - Your animal form can’t be too large (as large as an elephant, larger than size Large) or too small (as small as a cricket, smaller than size Small).

#### Optional Trait: Enhanced Hybrid Form

- **Effect**: you can choose two more benefits for your Hybrid Form.

