# Uncommon Races

The Commonwealth also includes countless other races and cultures, besides Gnolls, Humans, and the other pillar races; here are but a few.

### Clay Men

[[designnote]]
| Even more than the rest of the guide, Clay Men are still a work in progress.
| While at least one of the authors thinks they're interesting enough to keep in, they've proven to be difficult to get *just right*.
| Which may be obvious, given that several of the capabilities ascribed to them haven't made it into their rules-text yet.

The Clay Men have long dwelled deep underground; they are among the most unusual races of the Emerald Plane.
Explorers from the Commonwealth first contacted them more than six hundred years ago; though they where open enough to trade and cooperation, their isolation deep underground limited how much traffic was possible.

Despite being open and sociable, their extremely long lives and alien natures made them slow to seek closer alliance with others races and nations.
They have long suffered from attacks from the *Leapers*, who seem to be attempting to exterminate them.
When the Deep-Explorer Dwarves began to venture underground, the Clay Men allied with them against their mutual enemy — although the highly individualist Deep-Explorers have remained wary of the Clay Men, given that, like the Mind-Sharing Dwarves, the Clay Men blend their minds.
More recently, as large number of Kobolds have settled in the Commonwealth, the Clay Men have also begun to contact and trade with these (relatively) shallow-dug creatures.

As the Commonwealth prospered, as they expanded and explored further and further underground, and as they made major strides against the Leapers and their vassals, the Clay Men came to view them both more as an enlightened nation in which the Clay Men might be welcomed and respected despite their extreme differences, and as vital military allies against their mutual and deadly foes.
When the Commonwealth Compact was signed in CY 750, the Clay Men where one of several long-time allies who became formal signatories and members.

#### Alien Nature

The Clay Men have a unique nature.
They do not have distinct organs and tissues the way that most other races do; instead, they are a mass of living, undifferentiated material.
Without bones or organs, they have a great ability to stretch, compress and reshape themselves; they can also extend *pseudopods* for grip and locomotion.
They do not have eyes and are completely blind, but they do have an exceptional sense of hearing, the ability to perceive vibrations through solid surfaces, and the remarkable ability to create "pinging" sounds and interpret the echos to "see" their surroundings; these abilities serve them better than eyes in the lightless depths where they live.

Perhaps more remarkable — or more enviable — to surface dwellers, they are fueled at least in part by magic.
They need very little food, they do not sleep, and they do not age.

Even more amazing is their ability to literally *blend*.
Two Clay Men can extend pseudopods and partly *blend together*.
While blending, Clay Men can share, copy and exchange their minds, and can support one another if one is enjured or strained.

Their reproduction is also unique.
Individual Clay Men are sexless.
New individuals can be created by existing individuals literally splitting.
They have some control over this: it is possible for an individual to completely divide, creating two new individuals who bearing parts of the parent; but it is also possible for an individual to "bud," creating a new individual while remaining substantially themselves.
Clay Men can also do this individually or cooperatively: several Clay Men can come together — on their own, or with the mediation of a *reservoir* — and create a new individual from parts of all the participating individuals.

> *Clever* \[Clay-Man, Far Watch member\]: A common source of frustration members of other races encounter is how to address us.
> Commonwealth Standard has two additional gender modes that most languages lack — one for "gender-absent," which we often use, and one for "gender-ambiguous," which Tempters often use.
> Weal, for example, doesn't have these modes.
>
> River: … you're not going to juse tell us?
> All right, then, I'll ask: what should we call you?
>
> Clever: Ha!
> Fair point.
> In Weal, I prefer \[it\]; I think that's closer to the mark than either the plural \[they\] or the singular \[he\] or \[she\].
> But I don't speak for other Clay Men, only myself.

For Clay Men, combining "traits" is a separate act.
Whereas, for most races, the traits of a child are drawn from the traits of parents and grandparents, among Clay Men, traits can be *exchanged* between individuals (and reservoirs).

#### Clay Culture

Many of their communities center arund *reservoirs*—large masses of the living material that makes up Clay Men.
Unlike individual Clay Men, reservoirs aren't sentient or active in themselves; instead, reservoirs act as repositories.
Clay Men can *blend* with the reservoir, storing bits of themselves within — or accessing the stored minds and experiences of others.
Clay Men cannot copy their entire, living minds into a reservoir, but they can preserve a remarkable ammount of their memories, skills, personalities and knowledge — which other Clay Men can then access and draw from.

Unsurprisingly, many "Clay" communities center around the care (and defence) of these reservoirs, and the cultivation of useful skills and knowledge within.

This gives many Clay Men a unique outlook.
The reservoir gives them a measure of immortality — beyond even that provided by the fact that they do not age.
It also allows them to modify their minds in a way that few other races can; they can quite literally retrieve bits of knowledge or even personality from the reservoir, to suppliment or replace their own.
For this reason, some Clay Men are disposed to think of themselves as much as realizations of some of the minds stored with their reservoir as individuals themselves.

Notably, Clay Men seem to have extremely flexible and adaptive natures.
Clay Men have experimented with using magical and chemical means to alter physical forms.
Different communities sport different adaptations, which make their members suitable to different tasks; some can breath water and swim, for example, while others can exude caustic chemicals to tunnel through solid rock.
Recently, some Clay Men have experimented with developing a bony "rigging" internally, the better to operate on the surface among the other races of the Commonwealth.

Since they are not dependant on wide, cultivated fields, and since they do not age or die naturally, their communites tend to be small, and to grow very slowly if they grow at all.
Their communities are also heavily fortified and defended, to resist the Leapers.

Clay Men speak a unique language (simply called "clay") that makes use of very low frequencies — which most other races cannot hear or produce.

#### Commonwealth Integration

The Clay Men lagged behind the rest of the Commonewalth in architecture and mettallurgy, although they possess a sophisticated understandings of magic and medicine.
More practically, they have proved a fruitful source of minerals, metals, and rare materials from deep underground.

Notably, most of what the Commonwealth knows about the Leapers, they have learned from the Clay Men.
(Whatever secrets the Deep-Divers know, they have largely chosen not to share.)

Clay Men have a very distinctive vocalization range; while they can produce both very low and very high-pitched sounds, they struggle to produce complex patterns.
Most of them speak a local variant of the same root language, simply called "clay".
They can learn to speak Commonwealth Standard (though members of some other races find it painful to listent to for long periods of time).

#### Clay-Men Vitals

An ancient, amorphous race.

- Old Age: -
- Average Height: 1.8m
- Average Weight: 50kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 35, STR 20
- \+5 INT, \+5 SAV, \+5 WIL
- Movement: Burrow 3/9, Pseudopods 3/9, Roll 4/12/24
- Senses: Echo-Sight, Mage Sight, Tremor Sense
- Tags: Supernatural, Shape-Shifter, Amorphous, Clay Men
- Language Groups: CM
- *Amorphous*: Clay Men are amorphous, and can manipulate their shape
at will; they can stretch, narrow, ball up, flatten out, and so on.
  - This has many benefits: they can slip through very small openings, flatten themselves over surfaces, or roll into a ball to roll; they are also nearly impossible to tie down or grapple.
  - They do not have enough control to *mimic* an object (or creature)—except possibly a giant mass of cookie dough.
  - Notably, they cannot practically wear armor.
  - *Cavities*: Clay Men can hollow out *cavities*, which allows them to store (and manipulate) objects within themselves.
  - *Pseudopods*: Clay Men can extend *pseudopods*.
    Most can extend up to four *pseudopods*, of about a meter length.
  - *Ripples*: clay men can create creases, ripples, dimples, "cups", and other small features; this allows them to grip surfaces and manipulate small objects.
- *No Organs*: Clay Men do not have vital organs (or, indeed, differentiated tissues), and thus they are not vulnerable to attacks or powers that rely on targeting weak points or vital organs.
  - They have Resistance: Precision (Immunity), and critical hits against them are *downgraded*.
- *No Facing*: Clay Men have no particular “front” or facing (and no discrete sensory organs).
  They can perceive all around themselves, including directly above and below.
- *No Bones*: Lacking a skeletal structure, Clay Men cannot take advantage of *leverage*; this severely reduces their ability to deploy their strength.
  - Their DB is 0.
  - They suffer a -30 penalty on checks where *leverage* would be required.
- *Blind*: Clay Men have most of the senses that other races do — taste, touch, smell and hearing — but they are *blind*.
- *Acute Hearing*: Clay men have an incredible sense of hearing, stemming from their abilit to use their entire surface to detect sound.
  They gain a +20 bonus to auditory perception checks, and can hear both very low and very high pitches of sound.
- *Envelop*: Clay Men have a unique form of physical combat available to them: simply enveloping (and then digesting) an enemy; this works much like *grappling*, except that the grappled creature is pulled completely inside the Clay Man.
  - Enveloped targets are normally held immobile; but, if the enveloped creature succeeds on a STR+SOM check, they can deal damage to the Clay Man that has enveloped them with any weapon they are holding (or any natural weapon).
  - A Clay Man can begin to *digest* a creature that it has enveloped; this deals 1d10÷2 DV per turn.
- *Fast Healing*: Clay Men have Fast Healing 1
- *Fueled by Magic*: Clay Men have internal magical process that help to keep them going.
  They need to breath (by exchanging oxygen through their surface).
  They need to eat to grow, but they need little food when not growing or repairing damage.
  They do not need to sleep.
  They can be effected by disease, but are resistant to most diseases that affect humanoids (they have Resistance: Disease (+30 to checks to resist)).
  They do not age.
- *Blend*: Clay-Men can *blend* with *reservoirs* and with other Clay Men, joining their minds and bodies.
  Though the *blended* Clay-Men retain their separate identities, they gain a profound level of access to each-other's minds.
  They can communicate; exchange thoughts, ideas and information; and access one-another's skills and memories.
  They can even exchange or copy elements of one-another's minds.

#### Optional Background: Clay-Man Community

The character hails from one of the Clay-Men's subterranean communities.

- 10 ranks in Control
- 10 ranks in Spellcraft
- 10 ranks in any *Technical* skill
- A racial optional trait

Most members of Clay-Men Communities speak a local variant of *Clay* (CM).
The *Unique Outlook* trait is common, usually for *resistance to stress related to personal death*.

#### Optional Trait: Aquatic

Some Clay-Men have adapted themselves to aquatic environments.

- **Effect**: the character can breath under water, and gains the *Swim 4/12* movement mode.

#### Optional Trait: Caustic

Some Clay-Men have developed the ability to suffose all or part of themselves with caustic chemicals, which allows them to dissolve objects that they touch (or envelop).

- **Effect**: the character can make all or part of themselves *caustic*, which allows them to *dissolve* (and, optionally, *digest*) anything that they are in contact with (or have enveloped).
  - Objects or creatures in contact with a *caustic* Clay Man take 1d10÷2 DV per turn.
  - This increases the damage that they deal to an *enveloped* creature or object to 1d10 DV per turn.
  - They can make all, part or none of themselves caustic; they can, for example, render only a small patch of their surface *caustic*.
  - This makes it easier for them to burrow, which improves the rate of the *Burrow* movement to 4/12.
  - *Caustic* Clay Men can tunnel even through solid rock — although they are slowed to 2/6 when doing so.

#### Optional Trait: Color-Changing

Some Clay-Men can alter their coloration.

- **Effect**: the character can change their surface coloration.
  This allows them to create *shapes* or *patterns* down to the scale of a few centimeters, which allows them to display text or rudimentary images; to decorate themselves; to make themselves easy to spot (+20 to Perception checks); or camouflage themselves (+20 to Stealth).

#### Optional Trait: Eye-Spots

Some Clay Men have developed *eye-spots* on their surface, which gives them the ability to see.
The eye-spots don't have *lenses*, so each individual eye-spot has poor vision; information from all of them must be combined to build an image of the Clay Man's surroundings.

- **Effect**: the character has developed eye-spots on their surface.
  - The character gains the *Normal* and *Infrared* senses, and looses the *Blind* trait.
  - Visual perception checks have a -20 penalty.
  - Clay Men can perceive all around them their vision, just like with their other senses (as per the *No Facing* racial trait).

#### Optional Trait: Rigging

Some Clay-Men can produce an internal *skeleton*, which allows them to use internal leverage to better deploy their strength.

- **Effect**: the character can produce an internal support structure made of cartilage.
  - They can produce and dissolve the “rigging” at will.
  Creating the rigging is a Task Action with a six hour timeframe, and dissolving it is Task Action with a three-hour timeframe.
  - The rigging allows the Clay Man to take advantage of internal leverage, and thus negates the *No Bones* trait; it also increases their STR by 5.
  - However, the cartilage is fragile, and it exposes the character to bits of tiny broken cartilage tumbling through them when they are injured.  The cartilage reduces their DUR by 5.

#### Optional Trait: Sticky

Some Clay Men have adapted themselves to become *sticky*.

- **Effect**: the character can make all or part of themselves *sticky*.
  - This allows the character to easily grab onto surfaces and objects.
  - This provides the character with a +20 bonus to checks made to *grapple* or *envelop* characters.
  - The character gains the *Climbing 4/12* movement mode.

### Dwarves

Short but sturdy, Dwarves hail from the cold and snowy north.
Only about a third of the Dwarven Holds have signed the Commonwealth Charter, while the others remained independent.
A few adventurous Commonwealth dwarves travelled west with the Commonwealth, where they have dug holds in the Haven Isles, besides Ash Elves and Kobolds, and prospered.

#### Traditional Dwarven Culture

Dwarves originate in the frozen north, where the low peaks and rolling foothills of the Worldspine Mountains give way to the coast, the ocean, and the forested plains to their east and west.
Dwarves have long been comfortable living underground, surrounded by growing things: many of their ancient communities consisted of small numbers of bermed buildings in the relative flatlands of the northeast, or of structures dug into the foothills of the Worldspine — many small Dwarven communities built on the surface still consist largely of bermed buildings.
As Dwarves began to urbanize, their earthen construction became larger and deeper; the development of sophisticated mining and masonry techniques allowed them to incorporate stone into their construction and to build underground, eventually producing the Dwarven clan-holds that were common when the Empire of Man first contacted them.

Most modern Dwarven holds are large, wide, sturdy structures built of stone and earthwork; they are often dug shallowly, with substantial extent on the surface (as opposed to deeper-digging races like Kobolds, who often build entirely subterranean structures deep underground).
Dwarven Holds are often built in a ring around the base of a hill; more rarely, they may be dug into open ground, or partially dug into the slope of a mountain.
They often feature large open spaces on the interior, which provide ventilation, and serve as public spaces or gardens.

The old Dwarven culture of the North is centered around kin and custom.
Most Dwarven holds will be controlled by a Clan, consisting of several families — though some large holds may be governed by several Clans, and some large and wealth Clans control multiple holds.
Rather than law and governance as such, holds tend to be run by custom and consensus; authority is typically held by the heads of families.
Similarly, exchange is more often mediated by custom than currency, and there is a strong emphasis on caring for kin.

Dwarves are open enough and are rarely hostile, although they can be insular; it can be extremely difficult for an outsider to find a place in such a family-oriented society.
For this reason, only about a third of the Dwarven Clans of the north ever signed the Commonwealth Charter; the others have remained independent.

Dwarves have cultivated expertise in mining, stonework and agriculture.
Craftsmen also hold high status in Dwarven holds, and many Dwarven communities are known for the quality of the work of their artisans, which can rival the work of Human craftsmen.

#### Haven Isles Dwarves

Though only a few Dwarves chose to leave their northern lands and settle elsewhere in the Commonwealth, the communities founded by these travelers, explorers and exiles have endured, grown and prospered.
Today, Dwarves are one of the most common races in the huge urban centers of the Haven Isles in particular, where their own culture blends with their Kobold and Ash-Elf neighbors.

The Dwarves of the Haven Isles tend to be more mercantile; formal law and finance have substantially replaced tradition and custom in these communities.
Though some view this as a loss, it has made these communities far more open and accessible to outsiders; the Dwarves of the Haven Isles welcome guests, travelers and traders.

The Dwarves of the Haven Isles tend to get along particularly well with their Kobold neighbors, whose boisterous, zealous and optimistic nature are often welcome; these friendships can often be bittersweet, as Dwarves live much longer lives than Kobolds.
It is not unusual for one Dwarf to have a close and vital friendship with several generations of a Kobold family.

While many of these Dwarven populations reside in Holds dug into the peaks of the Haven Isles beside Ash Elves and Kobolds, several Dwarven clans have settled in the trading-cities and harbors of the Haven Isles' coast.
These "shipwright" Dwarves have come to cooperate closely with the Ratfolk, Halfling and Orcish shipwrights who have helped to build the Commonwealth's navy.

#### Mindsharing Dwarves

In CY 509, Dwarven explorers discovered a strange, psionically active fungus beneath the low peak of a small island in the northern Haven Isles.
The fungus proved to have remarkable capabilities, and an entirely new Dwarven culture has developed around it.
This organism is called "Fahra" in Hud, which is derived from "Fehr," or fungus; Clans that have accepted the organism as a symbiote are called Fahrat Clans.
The Common word for the organism is "Mindshare Fungus," which is an apt description of what it does.

Mindshare Fungus can thrive on its own in the damp dark of caves beneath the Emerald Plane as well as any other fungus can, but it also has the ability to derive nourishment from the magical energies of living creatures — what is commonly called psionic energy.
What's more, the fungus can actually colonize the bodies of some other creatures — including Dwarves, whose physiology is highly compatible with it.
Mindshare Fungus is not a parasite, however, but rather a symbiote; it does not harm its hosts, but it does provide them with some remarkable benefits.
The Mindsharing Fungus can "bridge" the minds of its hosts; this allows those hosts to exchange thoughts, experiences, knowledge, and even skills.
These exchanges are largely voluntary; hosts have a great deal of control over what they share with others and what they take in — although they cannot completely shut out the connection.

Normally, this effect only works over short distances — hosts need to be within a few *strides* of each-other to bridge their minds.
However, the effect can be "conducted" over greater distance by Mindsharing Fungus "plants" themselves — and these "plants" can be quite large, with many different surface growths connected by a vast rootwork.
Mindshare "plants" also have the remarkable ability to *store* and *retrieve* parts of the minds of users — ranging from simple messages or discrete memories to fragments of personalities.

A unique, highly communal culture has sprung up around the *Fahra*.
The Mindsharing Dwarves tend to be radically open, honest and egalitarian.
Even more than traditional Dwarves, they run their societies by consensus and memory — thanks to the Mindsharing Fungus, they have little need of courts, contracts, physical records, or even schools.
Members of Mindsharing communities will often share some personality traits — an individual's personality is never forcefully changed, as even Mindsharing Dwarves value their individuality, but rather occurs naturally and inevitably as the mind of each member slightly overlaps with every other in a community.
Some communities remain highly individualistic in their own way, where each member lives their own lives and pursues their own goals, merely using the *Fahra* to best live at peace with their neighbors; in other communities, however, members can begin to "vanish" into the collective.

No Mindsharing community has been known to forcefully recruit a member, or force its will on a member; this is due in part to their culture, in part to Commonwealth law, and in part to the fact that the trauma and misery inflicted on that individual would "leak" over the link — no matter how much they might try to stop it — and would "poison" all the other members.
Still, there are those that fear them.

Most Mindsharing Dwarves live in the Haven Isles.
A few have resettled in their traditional homeland, building a few Holds in the northeast of the Worldspine mountains; their distant kin have greeted them coolly (an understatement in the case of the Deep-Explorer Dwarves).

#### Deep-Explorer Dwarves

Deep-Explorer Dwarves are a Dwarven subculture that has vanished into the depths, substantially withdrawing from the affairs of surface-dwellers and "shallow diggers".
The Deep-Explorer Dwarves' origins lie in the *Lun*, a confederation of Dwarven holds in the northeastern peaks of the Worldspine mountains.
Independent and individualistic, they where not among the holds that joined the Commonwealth.
In CY 514, a community of Dwarves from the Haven Isles settled in an abandoned Hold near the territory of the *Lun*; these Dwarves had brought the *Fahra* with them, and began to culture and experiment with the symbiotic organism.

The fiercely individualistic *Lun* where horrified; they feared what their new neighbors might become, and were particularly alarmed that their hold was in a position to close off the *Lun*'s path out of the Worldspine Mountains.
The *Lun* sought a refuge that the *Fahrat* could never breach, and a path of escape that they could never cut off; they began digging deeper underground in CY 517, and by CY 533 they had almost entirely withdrawn from the surface — their former settlements where now little more than heavily-fortified trading-posts.

Today, little is known about the Deep-Explorer Dwarves — called the *Drahrat* in their own language, a deliberate dig at the *Fahrat*.

See also *Deep-Explorer Dwarves* in *Other Factions*.

#### Dwarven Vitals

- Old Age: 110 Years
- Average Height: 90cm
- Average Weight: 50kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 35, STR 30
- \+10 SOM, +10 WIL
- Movement: foot 3 / 9
- Senses: Normal, Infrared
- Size: Medium, *Squat*
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Dwarf
- Language Group: HHED
- *Squat*: Dwarves are treated as small targets when defending against ranged attacks (even though they are Medium-sized creatures).
- *Hardy*: Dwarves are known for their hardy constitutions, being resistant to both disease and poison.  Dwarves gain Resistance: Disease and Resistance: Poison

#### Optional Background: Dwarven Hold

You hail from a Dwarven Hold, either in the north of the Emerald Plane or one of the mountainous islands of the Haven Isles.

- 10 ranks in two Technical skills
- 10 ranks in Protocol
- 10 ranks in Barter

#### Optional Trait: Cave-Eyes

Some Dwarves eyesight has become extremely sensitive; this allows them very good vision in dim light, but it also makes them very sensitive to bright light.
This is extremely common among the *Drahrat*, most of whom cannot venture in daylight without day-masks (see below).

- You gain the *Low-Light* sense.
- You become highly sensitive to bright light; your are dazzled in bright light (such as daylight), suffering a -30 penalty to visual perception tests.
- Prolonged exposure to bright light is increasingly painful, eventually causing permanent damage to your vision.

#### Cultural Item: Day-Mask (Cost: Medium or Cost: Hight)

The *Day-Mask* consists of smoked lenses designed to filter out bright light, as well as a fabric or leather wrap that attaches them to the head.
The wrap is used to completely enclose the eyes, preventing light from "leaking" around the edges of the lenses; leather and wool are common in the north, while lighter fabrics (often dyed dark colors) are used in the south.

- You do not suffer any penalty from exposure to bright light (such as from the Cave-Eyes trait).
- You suffer a -10 penalty to visual perception checks.
- You suffer a -10 penalty in dim light.
- Normal Day-Masks are Cost: Medium

The lenses of some Day-Masks are *ground*, with different sections having different shapes.
This may be done to correct for poor vision, or may provide magnification at long or short range.

- *Ground* Day-Masks provide a +10 bonus to visual perception checks.
- *Grinding* a Day-Mask is Cost: Medium (in addition to the cost of the Day Mask).

Some Day-Masks are magical; their lenses are crystal-clear in dim light, but rapidly "smoke over" when exposed to bright light.

- Magical Day-Masks protect your eyes from bright light the way normal Day-Masks do, but they impose none of the penalties that normal Day-Masks have.
- The lenses "smoke over" in little more than a second.  If you are suddenly exposed to bright light, you may experience some dazzling (incurring a -10 penalty to visual perception tests), but this fades quickly (lasting only for the first turn of exposure).
- You can force the Day-Mask to become clear or smoked.
- Magical Day-Masks are usually *ground* (at no additional cost).
- Magical Day-Masks are Cost: High.

#### Cultural Item: Day-Wrap

Dwarves who cannot afford a Day-Mask — or who must do without one for some other reason — often use a *wrap* like a large bandanna; there are different ways to wear the *day-wrap*, but it is usually worn so that it shades the face and eyes.
\[Dwarven day-wraps are much like *shemaghs*.\]

Some day-wraps may be woven in complex patterns or richly died; many Clans and Holds have specific patterns and colors.

- When wearing a day-wrap — or improvising a similar covering — the penalty for exposure to bright light is reduced to -20.
- Day-wraps work by shading the eyes from the sun; they are ineffective against lights at eye-level.
- Day-Wraps are Cost: Trivial

#### Cultural Item: Deep-Explorer's Knife

*This weapon is a variant weapon.  It is similar to the Longsword, but deals slightly more one-handed damage (and slightly less two-handed damage), and gains Well Suited: Mighty Blow (and soak) in echange for Poorly Suited: Strike Armor Gap.*

Many Deep-Explorers wield a characteristic sword designed for use from salamander-back in close quarters.
They are long, broad-bladed, have a single cutting edge and are weighted towards the far end.
Although the grip is slightly small for it, the Deep-Explorer's Knife can also be wielded in two hands for better leverage.

Tags: One-handed, Two-handed, Bladed, Close, Difficult, Heavy, Soak, Poorly Suited: Strike Armor Gap, Well Suited: Mighty Blow

Damage: 1d10+5+DB (one-handed), 2d10-1+DB (two-handed)

AP: 2

#### Cultural Item: Repeating Crossbow

Deep-Explorer Dwarves use a type of repeating crossbow designed to exploit their access to exotic venoms and perform well in the tight, narrow, curling tunnels of their homes.
It fires rapidly by levering the firing mechanism back-and-forth under the stock; it stores bolts in a "hopper" on top of the weapon, and uses their own weight to feed them; and it re-stringing the bow on the backstroke.
While this mechanism cannot draw the bow to any great weight, it can be used to rapidly fire a hail of bolts.

These weapons are short-barreled and low-powered; instead of the high-damage and effective armor-penetration of other crossbows, they rely on volume of fire and poisoned bolts for effectiveness.

Tags: Two-handed, Ranged, Prone, Reload, Rapid-Fire, Soak

Damage 1D10+1

AP: 2

Reload: Quick Action per bolt

Special: Magazine.  Repeating Crossbows have a fixed *hopper* or *magazine* on top of the weapon.
Bolts are placed into the top of the box to load the weapon, and their own weight causes them to fall through the bottom into the weapon.  In effect, the crossbow reloads itself from the *hopper* as it fires, and the user need only reload the *hopper* after it is empty.  The magazines typically have a capacity of 10 bolts.

Special: The weapon continues to fire as long as the catch is depressed.
The bolt can be "tapped" to fire a single bolt, given a *short* squeeze to fire several bolts, or held down to fire all the bolts in the magazine.

When firing the crossbow, choose whether to *tap* the trigger, give it a *short squeeze*, or *empty the magazine*, and use the following modifiers:

- a *tap* first a single bolt and functions normally.
- a *short* squeeze uses up to 3 bolts; if all three are fired, deals \+1d10 DV, and gains +10 to the attack check.
- a *long* squeeze uses up to 10 bolts; if at least five are fired, deals \+3d10 DV, and gains +20 to the attack check.

#### Optional Trait: Mind-Sharing

You have a *Fahra* symbiote; this allows you to share parts of your mind with other Mind-Sharing Dwarves nearby, and for them to share their minds with you.

- You can *share your mind* with anyone else with the Mind-Sharing trait who is within 15m.
  - The Mind-Sharing Fungus serves as something of a conductor; if a Mind-Sharing Fungus is within range, then you can *share your mind* with anyone else with the Mind-Sharing trait who is within range of the same *Mind-Sharing Fungus*.
  - Note that many funguses are quite large; what may appear to be many different growths on the surface may actually all be parts of one huge plant, with a vast root-system.
- *Sharing your mind* provides several benefits:
  - you can communicate, as though speaking;
  - you can share a sense-perception (i.e. allowing someone to see through your eyes);
  - you can share memories (i.e. allowing someone to perceive your memories as you do);
  - you can share knowledge;
  - you can share your skills (if you have 30 or more ranks in a skill, then you can grant someone access to your skill; they are treated as if they have 15 ranks in that skill);
  - you can even "fortify" someone else's mind (if you have a rating of 25 or more in an aptitude, then you can "fortify" that aptitude in someone else; they are treated as having a rating of 15 in that aptitude).
- Being connected with the minds of others can cause some of your personality to blend with their, and vice-versa.
  - This effect is subtle, only occurs over the long-term, and is intended to be role-played; even in its most extreme form, it does not *require* a character to "loose themselves" to those they are sharing their mind with.

#### Optional Background: Mind-Sharing Dwarf

You are from a community of Mind-Sharing Dwarves.

- the Mind-Sharing trait.
- 10 ranks in Control
- 10 ranks in Protocol
- 10 ranks in one Technical skill

#### Optional Background: Deep-Explorer Dwarf

You are a *Drahrat*—called a "Deep-Explorer" in the Commonwealth.
You are from a member of a secretive culture that has vanished deep underground.

- 10 ranks in Ride
- 10 ranks in Survival
- 10 ranks in one Technical skill
- a Survival skill-kit, specialized for caves.
- one other skill-kit

The Cave-Eyes trait is very common, as are *day-wraps*.

Since the secrets of the Deep-Explorer Dwarves are left up to your GM, you should consult with them before deciding to play one; they may leave it up to you to describe the culture that your character is from, they might have plans for the Deep-Explorers that you will need to account for, or they may not allow you to play a Deep-Explorer at all.

### Gnomes

  - Gnomes live in burrows in the lower ranges of the World Spine Mountains.

  - Gnome burrows reside near the surface; they are “buried shallow,” with surface entrances.

  - Gnome communities tend to be small; a dozen families or fewer, spread across as many burrows.

  - Gnomish communities tend to be isolated; they are not eager to receive guests, not even other Gnomes.

  - The outsiders they deal most frequently with are Kobolds, from burrows dug deeper underground in the World Spine Mountains.

  - Gnome communities tend to be *idiosyncratic*, owing to their limited outside contact.

  - Gnomish culture can blend the hedonic and the materialistic in strange ways.
    Because their communities are small and isolated, they are used to suffering hardship and want; however, they are also highly pleasure-seeking in their own way, and tend to be highly libertine and indulgent in the pursuit of mortal pleasure (when they have the opportunity).

  - As a result, they may appear to be humble, simple and rustic — until evening descends, when the party drugs come out.

#### Vitals

- Old Age: 130 Years
- Average Height: 80cm
- Average Weight: 18kg
- Diet: Omnivore (preferential herbivore)

- DUR 25, ST 20
- \+5 INT, +5 COO, +10 WIL
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal, Low-Light
- Sizes: Small
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Gnome
- Language Group: HHED
- Alchemically Attuned: Gnomes double the duration of drugs, and
  Gnomes receive a +10 bonus to checks to resist the effects of drugs.

#### Optional Background: Gnomish Burrow

- 10 ranks in Craft: Alchemy
- 10 ranks in one other Technical skill
- 10 ranks in Stealth
- one skill kit
- one potion of Cost: Moderate, or 5 potions of Cost: Minor
- the Unique Outlook neutral trait
- Special: You do not receive one dot in Common for free, the way most characters do. Instead, you receive one dot in Worldspine Kobold (group DDK).

### Halflings

  - Halflings were one of the founding races of the Commonwealth.

  - Halflings have a somewhat unique dimorphic society; the young and
    hardy travel in Caravans, trading wares and selling their skills,
    while children, the infirm and the elderly live in fixed
    settlements.

  - Halfling communities tend to form close, symbiotic relationships
    with Gnollish villages and families. Halfling communities are
    frequently built near Gnollish towns and villages; they depend on
    the Gnolls for security and labor, and the Gnolls depend on the
    Halfling caravans to sell their produce.

  - In particular, Gnolls commonly travel with Halfling caravans,
    providing security — and services like smithing, for which Halflings
    are poorly suited.

  - Caravans of Halfling traders and Gnollish guards knitted together
    the early Commonwealth, and remain on of its most iconic elements — if
    distant kindgoms know nothing else about the Commonwealth, they know
    about the trade caravans, and might have been visited by one.

  - Halflings have not grown at the rate that the other races have
    grown, and other forms of trade — notably mediated by ships sailing
    along major rivers, and along the coasts — have eclipsed the Caravans
    in the ability to move goods. Because of this, the fortunes of
    Halflings have fallen somewhat.

  - Still, the Caravans remain numerous, and are a vital carrier of
    Commonwealth trade.

#### Halfling Vitals

One of the Founding Races, the merchants of the early Commonwealth.
Though they have fared well as the commonwealth has grown, their numbers have never grown as rapidly as other races’ have.

- Old Age: 80 Years
- Average Height: 1m
- Average Weight: 30kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 25, STR 20
- \+5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SAV, +5 WIL
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal
- Size: Small
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Halfling
- Language Group: HHED
- Survivors: Halflings have a remarkable ability to endure adversity.
  They get a +10 bonus on *Feat of Endurance* checks and checks to resist *Stress*.

#### Optional Background: Caravaneer

- 10 ranks in Barter
- 10 ranks in one Technical skill
- one Skill Kit
- one Halfling Wagon
- two horses

#### Cultural Item: Halfling Caravan Cart (Cost: High)

Halfling Wagons are large horse-drawn carts that serve as both a mobile residence, work-space and shop for a Halfling businessperson (and possibly some business-partners or family).

The carts varied; the humblest is essentially a discarded human wagon with bunks hung from boards running along the sides as walls, while the most expensive are large, wood-sided structures whose internal spaces are divided into floors and rooms (though small even by the standards of Halflings).
Some are even designed to be opened up, becoming small shops once set up.

In general, a Halfling Wagon can comfortably accommodate up to four halflings, and provide work space enough to carry and use (when stopped and set-up) a Shop.
Halflings Wagons are neither light nor fast; the are two-axled, and are most often pulled by two horses.

### Herders

  - Herders are tall, thin and *roughly* humanoid — besides the layer of
    short fur, the large, deer-like eyes, the antlers and the hooves.

  - They are also *extremely* fast, and more than a little skittish.

  - The Herder where a tribal society that existed in the far West of
    the Emerald Plane.

  - Though distant from the Shade Elves, they were still within their
    reach, because the Shade Elves where commonly mounted and could
    strike far to the North.

  - The Herders formed an alliance with several other nearby tribal
    cultures, including a tribal Gnollish culture, for defense against
    the Shade Elves.

  - They were first encountered by the Commonwealth in CY 255, and
    peaceful relations where established.
    
      - Between 341 an 344, the Shade Elves heavily raided both
        Commonwealth and Herder settlements; the two allied, and
        successfully devastated the Shade Elf raiders.
      - In CY 349, the Herders signed a treaty with the Commonwealth,
        becoming allies; when the Compact was ratified, the Herders
        formally became members of the Commonwealth.

  - Herders are very social creatures; the live in large settlements in
    the open, grassy plains and gentle hills of the far West of the
    Emerald Plane.
    
      - Though they are a primitive tribal society, they cannot digest
        meat efficiently, and so they practice agriculture — using inlets
        cut from rivers to irrigate grain fields and orchards. Check
        that this makes some sense.
      - They often hunt and trap, as much for the sake of pelt,
        tradition and trade as to feed themselves
      - Their settlements are often situated near rivers, and they farm
        and fish.
      - Many of their settlements are still walled, owing to the
        continued risk of Shade Elf raids, even to the present day — and
        despite the heavy presence in the region of Commonwealth guards.

  - They are a traditional and somewhat insular people, and show little
    interest in trade or exchange with the wider Commonwealth.

  - They make excellent archers, and are extremely quick over open
    terrain, which can make them frustrating opponents for Shade Elves,
    and valuable allies for other nearby tribes (and partners for tribal
    gnolls specifically).

#### Vitals

Quick, dextrous, sociable and peaceful – but also weak and frail.
They tend to be wary of outsiders, and are dangerous at range.

- Old Age: 45 years
- Average Height: 2.1m
- Average Weight: 75kg
- Diet: Herbivore

- DUR 25, STR 25
- \+10 COO, +5 INT +5 SAV
- Movement: Foot 6 / 18
- Senses: Normal, Motion-Sensitive
- Size: Medium
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Herder
- Language Group: GR
- Alert: Herders receive the Alert trait.

#### Optional Background: Herder Tribal Community

- 10 ranks in Fray
- 10 ranks in Ranged Weapons
- 10 ranks in one Social skill
- 10 ranks in Survival

### Orcs

  - Centuries ago, 165 years before the first Commonwealth Charter, orcs
    founded cities in the snowy Northern reaches far to the West of the
    World-Spine Mountain.
    
      - The oldest Orcish lands are located on a large, flat peninsula
        in the North-Western reaches of the Emerald Plane, separated
        from Dwarven lands by a gulf.
      - They were a tribal society: extended Families allied into Clans,
        and several Clans might cooperate to found a city.

  - They were a warlike honor-society
    
      - Orcs are large and have poor reflexes; they made poor riders,
        and so they marched to war on foot. Because of this, and their
        fractious nature, they rarely mustered large armies and marched
        to war.
      - They had ample access to sea and river; their clans built many
        small, shallow-draft long-boats, and they were terrifying
        raiders up and down the nearby coasts.
      - Threat of invasion, and promise of relief from raiding, were
        used to force other nearby societies to pay tribute; Orcs
        typically raided distant seaport cities, and the clans often
        warred among themselves.
      - For conflicts within their society, they used a system of
        ritualized combat.
      - The period before contact with the Commonwealth represents a
        golden age for the orcs, a period of wealth and power — and a time
        of misery for their neighbors.

  - Humans of the Old Empire avoided Orcish lands, using their
    tributaries as a buffer.

  - Centuries later, in CY 91, the Commonwealth began to spread west of
    the World-Spine, incorporating former Imperial human settlements and
    tribes (when willing) alike.
    
      - In CY 113, the Commonwealth allowed a tribe of Elves who the
        Orcs had claimed as tributaries to join; thereafter, the Elves
        stopped paying tribute, and the orcs sacked them.
      - This led the Commonwealth to lay siege to the Orcish clan-hold
        that launched the attack.
      - Other Orcish cities marshaled an army and attempted to break the
        siege; their attempt failed.
      - This led to 20 years of warfare between the Commonwealth; the
        Orcs were significantly outmatched by the Commonwealth military,
        and most of their tributaries were liberated. By CY 131, they
        were left with no tributaries, and were surrounded by
        Commonwealth settlements and Commonwealth-allied tribes.
      - The Commonwealth also began to fortify the coast and
        river-front; though expensive for the Commonwealth to construct,
        this effectively prevented Orc raiding, as their small and
        mobile raiding parties could not carry the means to break
        fortifications.

  - There followed a time of misery; without the tribute they depended
    on and unable to profitably raid, their society fell into decline.
    
      - They were riven by internal conflict, as individuals, families
        and clans battled over what wealth and power remained.
      - The Orcish population underwent a contraction, and their cities
        and roads suffered great neglect and decay.

  - A generation or Orcs grew up in misery, look out at the prosperous
    Commonwealth. Some went to explore it; on returning, they carried
    back stories of a prosperous, diverse society.
    
      - In CY 154, the orc Odna returned from exploring the
        Commonwealth, and began to advocate for a radical course:
        joining the Commonwealth and subscribing to their laws.
      - In CY 155, he challenged first his own clan head, and then a
        champion of the clans of his city; he won both challenges, and
        on behalf of his city and its clans, signed the Commonwealth
        Charter; thus did the city of Akala become the first Orcish city
        to join the Commonwealth.
      - Access to the Commonwealth’s markets greatly eased the misery of
        Akala; seeing their success, other movements in other clan-holds
        also sought to join the Commonwealth.

  - Today, Orcs have been members of the Commonwealth for almost 700
    years.
    
      - Orcish culture struggled to adapt itself to Commonwealth law and
        tradition: today, it is a blend of traditional Orcish elements,
        imports from the rest of the Commonwealth and uniquely Orcish
        innovations.
      - Their views on the Commonwealth and their place within it are
        complex. Though they take pride in being members of an ascendant
        and prosperous people, they also remember how they came to be
        members in it — the most traditional among their numbers claim
        that they were conquered, and that they still bear the shame of
        it.
      - Honor continues to be highly valued in Orcish society. Though
        most have taken the view that great works and labors are
        achievements worthy of honor and glory, the most traditional
        still believe that victory in combat is the greatest honor.
      - Though some orcs remain within their ancient borders and
        practice a (modified) version of their traditions, others travel
        the wider world seeking honor and accomplishment (and to bring
        wealth home, since Orcish communities still do not have adequate
        farming).
      - Unsurprisingly, many Orcs seek honor and recognition in the
        Commonwealth military. Orcs are very strong, and so many seek
        work as laborers and artisans — notably, Orcish cities boast
        impressive architecture. Orcs are also very clever, and some
        seek honor and achievement in the Commonwealth’s universities
        (Orcish scholars are generally not known for being nurturing and
        understanding mentors).
      - Notably, many Elvish communities exist near Orcish ones. Most
        orcs and elves have good relations, as they are both tribal
        cultures and have long lived near each other — for most, their
        time of conflict is centuries past and forgotten. Still, a few
        of the most traditional — in both communities — continue to nurse
        ancient grudges.

  - The Orcish people can claim 6 major cities: five are their
    traditional cities, and the sixth was established on the
    Commonwealth’s border with the Shade Elves. Of the orcs five
    traditional cities, three are members of the Commonwealth, and the
    remaining two are not.
    
      - When dealing with each other, orcs use their ancient customs,
        and orcs come and go between the Commonwealth and independent
        cities freely.
      - As a historical note, the city of Tonilac changed hands once: it
        was claimed by honorable combat by independent orcs, before
        being reclaimed by the Commonwealth six years later.
      - The city of Collac is a Commonwealth-member that was built on
        the border with the Shade Elves; it is heavily fortified, and
        the orcs there skirmish constantly with the Shade Elves, their
        allies, and their subjugate peoples.
      - Notably, the island city-state of Kethal is heavily settled by
        Orcs; in times past, it was shared amicably by Orcs and Dwarves.

  - Orcs have a vibrant mythos and rich oral history.
    
      - Orcs have several mythical heroes, about whom a great many
        stories have been told.
      - A particularly common point in Orcish Myth, which many
        historians believe corresponds to an actual event, is the Great
        Plague, an event some 15 generations ago that devastated many
        Orcish communities. The Great Pleague is frequently used a
        setting for heroic adventures of Orcish myth.
      - Over the last few hundred years, Orcs have actively transcribed
        many of these stories; their large libraries filled with
        beautifully-illuminated books are points of pride for their
        community.

  - Orcs are roughly humanoid. They are tall, lean and muscular. Their
    skin is typically either green, brown, or red; most clans will have
    one skin tone that is more common among them. Orcs also have
    prominent tusks.

#### Vitals

Physically large an opposing, orcs seek honor and accomplishment in all things.

- Old Age: 60 years
- Average Height: 2.2m
- Average Weight: 90kg
- Diet: Omnivore

- DUR 35, STR 35
- \+5 COG, +10 SOM, +5 WIL
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal, Low-Light, *Hunter's Senses*
- Size: Medium, *Great Stature*
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Orc
- Language Groups: HHED
- Hunter’s Senses: Orcs have acute senses of smell and hearing.
  They receive +10 to auditory and olfactory perception tests.
- Regeneration: orcs have Fast Healing 1.

#### Optional Background: Traditional Orcish Community

- 10 ranks in Intimidate
- 10 ranks in any two Combat skills
- 1 weapon and 1 shield

#### Optional Background: Commonwealth Orcish Community

- 10 ranks in Protocol
- 10 ranks in one Combat skill
- 10 ranks in one Technical skill
- 1 weapon and 1 skill kit

#### Cultural Item: Orcish Sabre

Orcs traditionally use a sword and shield when fighting.
They commonly use a large sword with a single edge (because they are easier to produce in large numbers).
The tips are commonly sharpened to a point, so that they may be used for thrusting.

Tags: One-handed, Bladed, Cavalry, Close, Defensive, Well Suited: Maim

Damage: 1d10+3+DB, AP: 1

#### Cultural Item: Orcish Sword

When Orcs fight as a unit, they use an unusual pole-arm.
It consists of double-sided, sword-like blade, perhaps 45cm long, at the end of a pole 200cm long or more.
The sword-end sometimes also sports guard-like blades at its base.

Tags: Two-handed, Reach, Bladed, Fend, Formation, Brace, Heavy

Damage: 2d10+2+DB, AP 2

### Ratfolk

  - More than 500 years ago, there was one Ratfolk civilization in the
    Warren Isles, an island chain off the Southwest near the Haven
    Isles.

  - They were organized into warrens run by families, and practiced
    fishing and farming.

  - In CY 331, 20 years before the Commonwealth started to settle Islandhome, several wealthy Ratfolk warrens united and forced their neighboring to pay tribute; they became wealthy and powerful while their kin suffored.  In the following years, other Ratfolk warlords began to rise in the Warren Isles.

  - In CY 361, the Shade Elves crossed the Shaded Sea and began to heavily raid the Warren Isles.
    
      - large numbers of Ratfolk begin fleeing the Warren Isles.
      - Some travel north to the Haven Isles, where they were eventually incorporated into the Commonwealth;
      - others fled South to the Ruby Plane, where they encountered the Raptors.

  - In CY 395, the conflict between the Warren Isles Ratfolk and the Shade Elves drags to a halt; in 398, the two form a tentative alliance, creating the Shaded Sea Peoples.
  
      - It is later learned that the "alliance" was a construct of the enigmatic Leapers.
      - The Leapers had attacked the major cities of Shade Elves and the largest warrens in the Haven Isles, and had forced both the Shade Elves and Ratfolk to pay them tribute.

  - There are now 3 distinct Ratfolk cultures:
    
      - they have a large population in the Commonwealth, first in the
        Haven Isles and now spreading throughout Heartland;
      - they are one of the two founders of the Raptor’s Alliance,
        formed with the raptors to repel Shaded Sea Peoples, including
        their “cousins”;
      - the Shaded Sea Peoples, a society consisting of Ratfolk and
        Shade Elf families.

  - Natural traders and merchants; in the Commonwealth, Ratfolk tend to
    get along well with Halflings and Humans.

  - As scavengers, they also get along well with Gnolls; Ratfolk are one
    of the few species that can eat the same food.

  - Ratfolk are one of the Commonwealth’s subterranean cultures; they
    often dwell in underground burrows.

  - Though Ratfolk do maintain their own culture and tradition, they
    were heavily assimilated into the established Commonwealth culture
    that sheltered them.

  - They are comfortable in urban environments and often live beside
    other races and cultures. They are comfortable above-ground and
    underground, and often work as traders and artisans.

  - Uniquely Ratfolk settlements are often organized around warrens;
    similar to Dwarven holds, they are mixed above-ground and
    subterranean structures. They still maintain fishing and seafaring
    traditions.

  - They commonly speak Haven Isles Ratfolk (language group GR).

#### Vitals

Traders and merchants, they tend to get along well with Halflings and Gnolls (they’re one of few species that can eat Gnollish food and speak Gnollish languages).
Taking very well to settled urban life, and growing very quickly.

- Old Age: 55 Years
- Average Height: 1.25m
- Average Weight: 34kg
- Diet: Omnivore (scavenger)

- DUR 25, STR 20
- \+5 COG, +5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SAV
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal, Infra-Red, Scent
- Size: Small
- Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Ratfolk
- Language Group: GR
- *Scavengers*: Rat-Folk are resistant to food-borne diseases.
  Theyvreceive +20 on checks against food-borne diseases.

#### Optional Background: Warren Isles Sea-Rat

The more sophisticated of the Shaded Sea People, Ratfolk are the shipwrights and sailors of the alliance.
They are still divided into Clan-oriented settlements, where each Clan consists of several family, each of which will maintain a warren and holdings.
They are loosely confederated, amongst themselves and with Shade Elves.

- 10 ranks in Intimidate
- 10 ranks in Profession: Pirate, Profession: Sailer or Profession: Fisher
- 10 ranks in one combat skill
- one weapon (of Cost: Moderate)
- one Skill Kit
- Special: Warren Isles Sea-Rats don’t receive one dot in Common the way most characters do.
  Instead, they receive one dot in Shaded Sea Common and one dot in Shaded.
  They commonly speak Warren Isles Ratfolk (language group GR) natively.

#### Optional Background: Raptor’s Plane Ratfolk

- The descendants of Ratfolk who fled Southward from their
  cousins, settled on the Raptor’s Plane and ultimately allied
  with the Raptors.
- They settled on the coasts and inland jungles closest to their
  cousins, and continue to suffer heavy raiding.
- Inland, they live in large, underground settlements, carved into
  the sides of rocky foothills.
- On the shores, where burrowing is impractical, they live in a
  walled cities of a few thousand.
- Still socially-inclined and natural traders, they have opened
  trade with the Commonwealth (and have been surprised to
  encounter their distant cousins in the Commonwealth’s fleets).
- They still fish and trade along rivers and shores, although
  Shaded Sea piracy makes this dangerous.

- 10 Ranks in Protocol
- 10 Ranks in one Combat skill
- 10 Ranks in one Trade Skill
- one weapon of Cost: Moderate
- one Skill Kit
- Special: Emerald Plane Ratfolk don’t gain 10 ranks in Common the way most characters do; instead, they gain 10 ranks in Protectorate Standard.
  They usually speak Protectorate Ratfolk as a native language.

### Shamblers

  - Shamblers are spirits bound to plants.

  - They originated in the dense marshes of the Southern lowlands to the
    West of the World-Spine Mountains.

  - They were created when Father Cypress, a Great Spirit who admired
    mortals and wished to interact with them, created plants with
    internal processes that could support Spirits, and fashioned of
    himself Spirits who could dwell within them.

  - Owing to their ability to root, Shambler communities lack cleared
    fields and grazing-lands — they also tend to have an active night
    life.

  - Despite being the children of a Great Spirit associated with
    isolated, deep swamps, Shamblers can be surprisingly urbane; they
    are welcoming of outsiders, and host many artisans and traders.

  - Shamblers are inquisitive, and their ability to root makes them
    light travelers; they therefore spawn many adventurers, explorers
    and wanderers.

#### Vitals

Spirits bound to plants.

- Old Age: -
- Average Height: 1.8m
- Average Weight: 60kg
- Diet: Omnivore (preferential herbivore), *Rooting*

- DUR 35, STR 30
- \+10 INT, +5 SOM, +5 WIL
- Movement: Foot 4 / 12
- Senses: Normal, Mage-Sight
- Size: Medium
- Tags: Supernatural, Humanoid, Shambler
- Language Groups: HHED
- *Rooting*: shamblers can *root*: when rooted, shamblers look more like natural trees (they may attempt a Disguise check to pass as a natural tree).
  While rooted, Shamblers have Fast Healing 2.
  - It is a one minute Task Action to either root or unroot.
  - If a shambler roots for 1 hour (in a location with access to sunlight, in good soil), then they will not need to otherwise eat, sleep or drink for 24 hours.

#### Optional Background: Shambler Community

- 10 ranks in two Technical skills
- 10 ranks in Survival
- one Skill Kit
- one weapon (of Cost: Moderate)

### Tempters

  - shape-shifting spirit beings. Charming and suave, but also very frail.

  - They can shape shift freely.
  
  - They tend to live in urban centers among other races. Some Tempters live openly among the large cities of the Commonwealth; more almost certainly live in secret.

#### Tempter Vitals

Shape-shifting spirits; charming and suave, but also frail.

- Old Age: None
- Average Height: by shape
- Average Weight: by shape
- Diet: by shape

- DUR 25, STR 25
- \+5 INT, +5 SAV, +5 WIL
- Movement: Shape-Dependant (usually Foot 4/12)
- Senses: Normal, Mage-Sight
- Size: Shape-Dependant (restricted to Medium without the Master Shifter class)
- Tags: Spirit, Shape-Shifter, Tempter
- Language Group: Any
- *Appearance of Flesh*: Even though Tempters are spirits, they are bound to the nature of flesh;they have a physical form, they can be wounded and killed, they can sicken, and they need to eat, drink, breath and sleep just like mortal beings.
  - However, because they are so bound to the nature of flesh, they are not immediately obvious as spirits to those with Mage Sight.  In order for someone with Mage Sight to recognize a Tempter, a detailed examination is required; this is a 10 minute Task Action, requiring either a Search or Spellcraft check at -20.
- *Shape-Shifting*: Tempters can take the form of any medium-sized natural creature. They can control the details of their physical form as they wish, including being able to mimic specific individuals.
  - They must take the form of a *real* (in the worlf of Renaissance) creature; they can't assume the shape of any arbitrary thing they could imagine.  That is, they can, for example, appear to be a Human, a Gnoll, a Drake and so on, but they cannot appear to be a ball of arms, legs and claws.
  - They can change shape as a Standard Action.
  - They can control their shape precisely enough that they can appear to be a specific person.
    - Assuming the form of a *specific* individual requires a Disguise check at +10.
    - To competently impersonate a person whose shape they have assumed, they will still need to use the Disguise and Deception skills, but they receive a +30 and +10 bonus on these checks, respectively.
    - Obviously, they can only mimic the features of a person that they know about.  If someone has a birthmark on their lower back, but the Shifter character has never seen that person naked, then they won't know to mimic that birthmark.  And, of course, if they've never seen a person, they cannot effectively mimic them.
  - Normally, changing shape does not affect their statistics — but see the powers listed below.
- *Mimics*: Tempters can also mimic the *speech* of any race whose shape they can take, and can mimic the voice of specific individuals.
  - Much like mimicing an individual's appearance, they still need to know what that person sounds like, and they will still need to use Disguise and Deception checks to actually impersonate someone.
- *Basin*: Like other Spirits, Tempters have a Basin (see *The Supernatural*): the mental energies of other intelligent beings.

#### Optional Negative Trait: Bind

Like some Spirits, you have a *bind* (see *The Supernatural*).

- **Effect:** You have a *Bind*.
  - You should work out the details of your bind with your GM; your GM has final approval.
  - The bind should pose a real danger to you.  It must be known to at least one clerical organization in the area where you live — although it does not need to be *widely* known.

#### Optional Power: More than Form Alone

When you assume the form of a given race, you can adopt some of their nature.

- **Effect:** When you assume the form of a given race, you may choose one Aptitude in which that race has a bonus; you gain a +5 bonus to the chosen aptitude.
  - You may choose STR or DUR if that race has a higher STR or DUR than you do.

#### Optional Power: To Crawl and Soar

You can mimic the construction of other races well enough that you gain some of their biological capabilities.

- **Effect:** When you assume the form of a given race, you may choose to gain two of the following benefits:
  - One Movement Mode that race has.
  - One Sense that race has.
  - That race's *natural armor bonus* (but not more than +3).
  - One natural attack that race has.

#### Optional Class: Master Shifter

You have mastered your ability to change your shape, allowing you to push the limits of what is possible.

- **Requirement:** either the *More than Form Alone* or *To Crawl and Soar* power (or both).
- **Effect:** When you assume a new form, you may choose one of the following:
  - If you have the *More than Form Alone* power, you may choose a second aptitude to gain a bonus in, using the same rules as the first.
  - If you have the *To Crawl and Soar* power, you may choose two additional bonuses.
  - You may take the form of a race with the Empowered tag.  (Normally, you could only take the form of a Natural creature.)
  - You may take the form of a small creature.  (Normally, you could only take the form of a Medium-sized creature.)

#### Optional Class: Empath

You have extensively developed your race's empathic talents, giving you a limited ability to sense and manipulate the emotions of others.

- **Effect:** You gain the *Empath* sense.
  - This sense has a limited range — roughly 10 meters, although you may be able to read intense emotion from further away.
  - Manipulating other's emotions is a 5 Turn Task Action; it requires either a Control Check or a SAV+WIL+WIL check, and is opposed by the target's INT+WIL.  If you use your SAV+WIL+WIL then exceptional and critical successes are ignored.
  - Your ability to drive other's emotions is limited; it stops far short of allowing you to control other people, but it does allow you to bring forward or suppress specific emotions in others.

